So shaken as we are, so wan with care, Find we a time for frighted peace to pant, And breathe short-winded accents of new broils To be commenced in strands afar remote.

But this our purpose now is twelve month old, And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go: Therefore we meet not now.

Then let me hear Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland, What yesternight our council did decree In forwarding this dear expedience.

It seems then that the tidings of this broil Brake off our business for the Holy Land.

Here is a dear, a true industrious friend, Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse.

Stain'd with the variation of each soil Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours, And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news.

The Earl of Douglas is discomfited: Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights, Balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter see On Holmedon's plains.

O that it could be proved That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged In cradle-clothes our children where they lay, And call'd mine Percy, his Plantagenet! Then would I have his Harry, and he mine.

What think you, coz, Of this young Percy's pride? the prisoners, Which he in this adventure hath surprised, To his own use he keeps, and sends me word, I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.

This is his uncle's teaching, this is Worcester, Malevolent to you in all aspects, Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up The crest of youth against your dignity.

But I have sent for him to answer this, And for this cause awhile we must neglect Our holy purpose to Jerusalem.

Cousin, on Wednesday next our council we Will hold at Windsor, so inform the lords: But come yourself with speed to us again, For more is to be said and to be done Than out of anger can be uttered.

Indeed, you come near me now, Hal, for we that take purses go by the moon and the seven stars, and not by Phoebus, he,'that wandering knight so fair.

Thou sayest well, and it holds well too, for the fortune of us that are the moon's men doth ebb and flow like the sea, being governed, as the sea is, by the moon.

And is not my hostess of the tavern a most sweet wench? As the honey of Hybla, my old lad of the castle.

Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part? No, I'll give thee thy due, thou hast paid all there.

Yea, and elsewhere, so far as my coin would stretch, and where it would not, I have used my credit.

Shall I? O rare! By the Lord, I'll be a brave judge.

Thou judgest false already: I mean, thou shalt have the hanging of the thieves and so become a rare hangman.

Well, Hal, well, and in some sort it jumps with my humour as well as waiting in the court, I can tell For obtaining of suits? Yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangman hath no lean wardrobe.

'Sblood, I am as melancholy as a gib cat or a lugged bear.

What sayest thou to a hare, or the melancholy of Thou hast the most unsavoury similes and art indeed the most comparative, rascalliest, sweet young prince.

But, Hal, I prithee, trouble me no more with vanity.

I would to God thou and I knew where a commodity of good names were to be bought.

Thou didst well, for wisdom cries out in the streets, and no man regards it.

O, thou hast damnable iteration and art indeed able to corrupt a saint.

Thou hast done much harm upon me, Hal, God forgive thee for it! Before I knew thee, Hal, I knew nothing, and now am I, if a man should speak truly, little better than one of the wicked.

I see a good amendment of life in thee, from praying to purse-taking.

Why, Hal, 'tis my vocation, Hal, 'tis no sin for a man to labour in his vocation.

Poins! Now shall we know if Gadshill have set a match.

O, if men were to be saved by merit, what hole in hell were hot enough for him? This is the most omnipotent villain that ever cried 'Stand' to a true man.

Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil.

If you will go, I will stuff your purses full of crowns, if you will not, tarry at home and be hanged.

Hear ye, Yedward, if I tarry at home and go not, I'll hang you for going.

You will, chops? Hal, wilt thou make one? Who, I rob? I a thief? not I, by my faith.

There's neither honesty, manhood, nor good fellowship in thee, nor thou camest not of the blood royal, if thou darest not stand for ten shillings.

By the Lord, I'll be a traitor then, when thou art king.

Sir John, I prithee, leave the prince and me alone: I will lay him down such reasons for this adventure that he shall go.

Yea, but 'tis like that they will know us by our horses, by our habits and by every other appointment, to be ourselves.

Tut! our horses they shall not see: I'll tie them in the wood, our vizards we will change after we leave them: and, sirrah, I have cases of buckram for the nonce, to immask our noted outward garments.

Well, for two of them, I know them to be as true-bred cowards as ever turned back, and for the third, if he fight longer than he sees reason, I'll forswear arms.

Well, I'll go with thee: provide us all things necessary and meet me to-morrow night in Eastcheap, there I'll sup.

If all the year were playing holidays, To sport would be as tedious as to work, But when they seldom come, they wish'd for come, And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents.

I'll so offend, to make offence a skill, Redeeming time when men think least I will.

Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves The scourge of greatness to be used on it, And that same greatness too which our own hands Have holp to make so portly.

You have good leave to leave us: when we need Your use and counsel, we shall send for you.

With many holiday and lady terms He question'd me, amongst the rest, demanded My prisoners in your majesty's behalf.

This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord, I answer'd indirectly, as I said, And I beseech you, let not his report Come current for an accusation Betwixt my love and your high majesty.

Never did base and rotten policy Colour her working with such deadly wounds, Nor could the noble Mortimer Receive so many, and all willingly: Then let not him be slander'd with revolt.

Thou dost belie him, Percy, thou dost belie him, He never did encounter with Glendower: I tell thee, He durst as well have met the devil alone As Owen Glendower for an enemy.

Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer: Send me your prisoners with the speediest means, Or you shall hear in such a kind from me As will displease you.

My Lord Northumberland, We licence your departure with your son.

An if the devil come and roar for them, I will not send them: I will after straight And tell him so, for I will ease my heart, Albeit I make a hazard of my head.

What, drunk with choler? stay and pause awhile: Here comes your uncle.

And for whose death we in the world's wide mouth Live scandalized and foully spoken of.

But soft, I pray you, did King Richard then Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer Heir to the crown? He did, myself did hear it.

Nay, then I cannot blame his cousin king, That wished him on the barren mountains starve.

Those same noble Scots That are your prisoners,-- I'll keep them all, By God, he shall not have a Scot of them, No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not: I'll keep them, by this hand.

Farewell, kinsman: I'll talk to you When you are better temper'd to attend.

Nay, if you have not, to it again, We will stay your leisure.

You, my lord, To Northumberland Your son in Scotland being thus employ'd, Shall secretly into the bosom creep Of that same noble prelate, well beloved, The archbishop.

Of York, is it not? True, who bears hard His brother's death at Bristol, the Lord Scroop.

I speak not this in estimation, As what I think might be, but what I know Is ruminated, plotted and set down, And only stays but to behold the face Of that occasion that shall bring it on.

Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot, And then the power of Scotland and of York, To join with Mortimer, ha? And so they shall.

Cousin, farewell: no further go in this Than I by letters shall direct your course.

What, ostler! I prithee, Tom, beat Cut's saddle, put a few flocks in the point, poor jade, is wrung in the withers out of all cess.

Peas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that is the next way to give poor jades the bots: this house is turned upside down since Robin Ostler died.

Poor fellow, never joyed since the price of oats rose, it was the death of him.

I think this be the most villanous house in all London road for fleas: I am stung like a tench.

Like a tench! by the mass, there is ne'er a king christen could be better bit than I have been since the first cock.

Why, they will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then we leak in your chimney, and your chamber-lie breeds fleas like a loach.

What, ostler! come away and be hanged! I have a gammon of bacon and two razors of ginger, to be delivered as far as Charing-cross.

God's body! the turkeys in my pannier are quite starved.

What, ostler! A plague on thee! hast thou never an eye in thy head? canst not hear? An 'twere not as good deed as drink, to break the pate on thee, I am a very villain.

Come, and be hanged! hast thou no faith in thee? Good morrow, carriers.

I pray thee lend me thy lantern, to see my gelding in the stable.

Nay, by God, soft, I know a trick worth two of that, i' faith.

Ay, when? can'st tell? Lend me thy lantern, quoth he? marry, I'll see thee hanged first.

Sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to London? Time enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrant thee.

Come, neighbour Mugs, we'll call up the gentleman: they will along with company, for they have great charge.

What, ho! chamberlain! That's even as fair as--at hand, quoth the chamberlain, for thou variest no more from picking of purses than giving direction doth from labouring, thou layest the plot how.

They are up already, and call for eggs and butter, they will away presently.

Sirrah, if they meet not with Saint Nicholas' clerks, I'll give thee this neck.

No, I'll none of it: I pray thee keep that for the hangman, for I know thou worshippest St.

What talkest thou to me of the hangman? if I hang, I'll make a fat pair of gallows, for if I hang, old Sir John hangs with me, and thou knowest he is no starveling.

What, the commonwealth their boots? will she hold out water in foul way? She will, she will, justice hath liquored her.

We steal as in a castle, cocksure, we have the receipt of fern-seed, we walk invisible.

Nay, by my faith, I think you are more beholding to the night than to fern-seed for your walking invisible.

Give me thy hand: thou shalt have a share in our purchase, as I am a true man.

Nay, rather let me have it, as you are a false thief.

Bid the ostler bring my gelding out of the stable.

Come, shelter, shelter: I have removed Falstaff's horse, and he frets like a gummed velvet.

Poins! Poins, and be hanged! Poins! Peace, ye fat-kidneyed rascal! what a brawling dost thou keep! Where's Poins, Hal? He is walked up to the top of the hill: I'll go seek him.

I am accursed to rob in that thief's company: the rascal hath removed my horse, and tied him I know not where.

If I travel but four foot by the squier further afoot, I shall break my wind.

Well, I doubt not but to die a fair death for all this, if I 'scape hanging for killing that rogue.

I have forsworn his company hourly any time this two and twenty years, and yet I am bewitched with the rogue's company.

If the rascal hath not given me medicines to make me love him, I'll be hanged, it could not be else: I have drunk medicines.

Poins! Hal! a plague upon you both! Bardolph! Peto! I'll starve ere I'll rob a foot further.

An 'twere not as good a deed as drink, to turn true man and to leave these rogues, I am the veriest varlet that ever chewed with a tooth.

Have you any levers to lift me up again, being down? 'Sblood, I'll not bear mine own flesh so far afoot again for all the coin in thy father's exchequer.

What a plague mean ye to colt me thus? Thou liest, thou art not colted, thou art uncolted.

I prithee, good Prince Hal, help me to my horse, good king's son.

Out, ye rogue! shall I be your ostler? Go, hang thyself in thine own heir-apparent garters! If I be ta'en, I'll peach for this.

An I have not ballads made on you all and sung to filthy tunes, let a cup of sack be my poison: when a jest is so forward, and afoot too! I hate it.

Bardolph, what news? Case ye, case ye, on with your vizards: there 's money of the king's coming down the hill, 'tis going to the king's exchequer.

You lie, ye rogue, 'tis going to the king's tavern.

Sirs, you four shall front them in the narrow lane, Ned Poins and I will walk lower: if they 'scape from your encounter, then they light on us.

'Zounds, will they not rob us? What, a coward, Sir John Paunch? Indeed, I am not John of Gaunt, your grandfather, but yet no coward, Hal.

Sirrah Jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge: when thou needest him, there thou shalt find him.

Ned, where are our disguises? Here, hard by: stand close.

Now, my masters, happy man be his dole, say I: every man to his business.

Come, neighbour: the boy shall lead our horses down the hill, we'll walk afoot awhile, and ease our legs.

Jesus bless us! Strike, down with them, cut the villains' throats: ah! whoreson caterpillars! bacon-fed knaves! they hate us youth: down with them: fleece them.

O, we are undone, both we and ours for ever! Hang ye, gorbellied knaves, are ye undone? No, ye fat chuffs: I would your store were here! On, bacons, on! What, ye knaves! young men must live.

You are Grand-jurors, are ye? we'll jure ye, 'faith.

Exeunt Re-enter PRINCE HENRY and POINS The thieves have bound the true men.

Now could thou and I rob the thieves and go merrily to London, it would be argument for a week, laughter for a month and a good jest for ever.

Come, my masters, let us share, and then to  horse before day.

An the Prince and Poins be not two arrant cowards, there's no equity stirring: there's no more valour in that Poins than in a wild-duck.

Your money! As they are sharing, the Prince and Poins set upon  them, they all run away, and Falstaff, after a blow or two, runs away too, leaving the booty behind them Got with much ease.

Now merrily to horse: The thieves are all scatter'd and possess'd with fear So strongly that they dare not meet each other, Each takes his fellow for an officer.

Falstaff sweats to death, And lards the lean earth as he walks along: Were 't not for laughing, I should pity him.

How the rogue roar'd! 'But for mine own part, my lord, I could be well contented to be there, in respect of the love I bear your house.

He could be contented: why is he not, then? In respect of the love he bears our house: he shows in this, he loves his own barn better than he loves our house.

'The purpose you undertake is dangerous, the friends you have named uncertain, the time itself unsorted, and your whole plot too light for the counterpoise of so great an opposition.

Say you so, say you so? I say unto you again, you are a shallow cowardly hind, and you lie.

What a frosty-spirited rogue is this! Why, my lord of York commends the plot and the general course of action.

'Zounds, an I were now by this rascal, I could brain him with his lady's fan.

O, I could divide myself and go to buffets, for moving such a dish of skim milk with so honourable an action! Hang him! let him tell the king: we are prepared.

How now, Kate! I must leave you within these two hours.

O, what portents are these? Some heavy business hath my lord in hand, And I must know it, else he loves me not.

What, ho! Is Gilliams with the packet gone? He is, my lord, an hour ago.

Hath Butler brought those horses from the sheriff? One horse, my lord, he brought even now.

What horse? a roan, a crop-ear, is it not? It is, my lord.

Well, I will back him straight: O esperance! Bid Butler lead him forth into the park.

What say'st thou, my lady? What is it carries you away? Why, my horse, my love, my horse.

Out, you mad-headed ape! A weasel hath not such a deal of spleen As you are toss'd with.

In faith, I'll know your business, Harry, that I will.

I fear my brother Mortimer doth stir About his title, and hath sent for you To line his enterprise: but if you go,-- So far afoot, I shall be weary, love.

Come, come, you paraquito, answer me Directly unto this question that I ask: In faith, I'll break thy little finger, Harry, An if thou wilt not tell me all things true.

God's me, my horse! What say'st thou, Kate? what would'st thou have with me? Do you not love me? do you not, indeed? Well, do not then, for since you love me not, I will not love myself.

Do you not love me? Nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.

Come, wilt thou see me ride? And when I am on horseback, I will swear I love thee infinitely.

But hark you, Kate, I must not have you henceforth question me Whither I go, nor reason whereabout: Whither I must, I must, and, to conclude, This evening must I leave you, gentle Kate.

But hark you, Kate: Whither I go, thither shall you go too, To-day will I set forth, to-morrow you.

Ned, prithee, come out of that fat room, and lend me thy hand to laugh a little.

Where hast been, Hal? With three or four loggerheads amongst three or four score hogsheads.

Sirrah, I am sworn brother to a leash of drawers, and can call them all by their christen names, as Tom, Dick, and Francis.

They call drinking deep, dyeing scarlet, and when you breathe in your watering, they cry  'hem!' and bid you play it off.

To conclude, I am so good a proficient in one quarter of an hour, that I can drink with any tinker in his own language during my life.

I tell thee, Ned, thou hast lost much honour, that thou wert not with me in this sweet action.

Look down into the Pomgarnet, Ralph. Come hither, Francis.

My lord? How long hast thou to serve, Francis? Forsooth, five years, and as much as to-- Anon, anon, sir.

Five year! by'r lady, a long lease for the clinking of pewter.

How old art thou, Francis? Let me see--about Michaelmas next I shall be-- Anon, sir.

Anon, Francis? No, Francis, but to-morrow, Francis, or, Francis, o' Thursday, or indeed, Francis, when thou wilt.

My lord, old Sir John, with half-a-dozen more, are at the door: shall I let them in? Let them alone awhile, and then open the door.

Sirrah, Falstaff and the rest of the thieves are at the door: shall we be merry? As merry as crickets, my lad.

Re-enter FRANCIS What's o'clock, Francis? Anon, anon, sir.

That ever this fellow should have fewer words than a parrot, and yet the son of a woman! His industry is upstairs and downstairs, his eloquence the parcel of a reckoning.

I am not yet of Percy's mind, the Hotspur of the north, he that kills me some six or seven dozen of Scots at a breakfast, washes his hands, and says to his wife 'Fie upon this quiet life! I want work.

'O my sweet Harry,' says she, 'how many hast thou killed to-day?' 'Give my roan horse a drench,' says he, and answers 'Some fourteen,' an hour after, 'a trifle, a trifle.

I prithee, call in Falstaff: I'll play Percy, and that damned brawn shall play Dame Mortimer his wife.

'Rivo!' says the drunkard. Call in ribs, call in tallow. Welcome, Jack: where hast thou been? A plague of all cowards, I say, and a vengeance too! marry, and amen! Give me a cup of sack, boy.

Ere I lead this life long, I'll sew nether stocks and mend them and foot them too.

A plague of all cowards! Give me a cup of sack, rogue.

Is there no virtue extant? He drinks Didst thou never see Titan kiss a dish of butter? pitiful-hearted Titan, that melted at the sweet tale of the sun's! if thou didst, then behold that compound.

You rogue, here's lime in this sack too: there is nothing but roguery to be found in villanous man: yet a coward is worse than a cup of sack with lime in it.

A villanous coward! Go thy ways, old Jack, die when thou wilt, if manhood, good manhood, be not forgot upon the face of the earth, then am I a shotten herring.

There live not three good men unhanged in England, and one of them is fat and grows old: God help the while! a bad world, I say.

I would I were a weaver, I could sing psalms or any thing.

I call thee coward! I'll see thee damned ere I call thee coward: but I would give a thousand pound I could run as fast as thou canst.

You are straight enough in the shoulders, you care not who sees your back: call you that backing of your friends? A plague upon such backing! give me them that will face me.

Give me a cup of sack: I am a rogue, if I drunk to-day.

O villain! thy lips are scarce wiped since thou drunkest last.

What's the matter? What's the matter! there be four of us here have ta'en a thousand pound this day morning.

Where is it, Jack? where is it? Where is it! taken from us it is: a hundred upon poor four of us.

What, a hundred, man? I am a rogue, if I were not at half-sword with a dozen of them two hours together.

A plague of all cowards! Let them speak: if they speak more or less than truth, they are villains and the sons of darkness.

Speak, sirs, how was it? We four set upon some dozen-- Sixteen at least, my lord.

You rogue, they were bound, every man of them, or I am a Jew else, an Ebrew Jew.

As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us-- And unbound the rest, and then come in the other.

Nay, that's past praying for: I have peppered two of them, two I am sure I have paid, two rogues in buckram suits.

I tell thee what, Hal, if I tell thee a lie, spit in my face, call me horse.

Thou knowest my old ward, here I lay and thus I bore my point.

Four rogues in buckram let drive at me-- What, four? thou saidst but two even now.

These four came all a-front, and mainly thrust at me.

I made me no more ado but took all their seven points in my target, thus.

Dost thou hear me, Hal? Ay, and mark thee too, Jack.

These nine in buckram that I told thee of-- So, two more already.

Their points being broken,-- Down fell their hose.

Began to give me ground: but I followed me close, came in foot and hand, and with a thought seven of the eleven I paid.

These lies are like their father that begets them, gross as a mountain, open, palpable.

What, upon compulsion? 'Zounds, an I were at the strappado, or all the racks in the world, I would not tell you on compulsion.

Give you a reason on compulsion! If reasons were as plentiful as blackberries, I would give no man a reason upon compulsion, I.

We two saw you four set on four and bound them, and were masters of their wealth.

Instinct is a great matter, I was now a coward on instinct.

I shall think the better of myself and thee during my life, I for a valiant lion, and thou for a true prince.

But, by the Lord, lads, I am glad you have the money.

Hostess, clap to the doors: watch to-night, pray to-morrow.

Gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold, all the titles of good fellowship come to you! What, shall we be merry? shall we have a play extempore? Content, and the argument shall be thy running away.

Give him as much as will make him a royal man, and send him back again to my mother.

What doth gravity out of his bed at midnight? Shall I give him his answer? Prithee, do, Jack.

Yea, and to tickle our noses with spear-grass to make them bleed, and then to beslubber our garments with it and swear it was the blood of true men.

I did that I did not this seven year before, I blushed to hear his monstrous devices.

O villain, thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen years ago, and wert taken with the manner, and ever since thou hast blushed extempore.

Thou hadst fire and sword on thy side, and yet thou rannest away: what instinct hadst thou for it? My lord, do you see these meteors? do you behold these exhalations? I do.

What think you they portend? Hot livers and cold purses.

Re-enter FALSTAFF Here comes lean Jack, here comes bare-bone.

There's villanous news abroad: here was Sir John Bracy from your father, you must to the court in the morning.

Well, that rascal hath good mettle in him, he will not run.

Why, what a rascal art thou then, to praise him so for running! O' horseback, ye cuckoo, but afoot he will not budge a foot.

Why, then, it is like, if there come a hot June and this civil buffeting hold, we shall buy maidenheads as they buy hob-nails, by the hundreds.

By the mass, lad, thou sayest true, it is like we shall have good trading that way.

Well, thou wert be horribly chid tomorrow when thou comest to thy father: if thou love me, practise an answer.

Do thou stand for my father, and examine me upon the particulars of my life.

Shall I? content: this chair shall be my state, this dagger my sceptre, and this cushion my crown.

Give me a cup of sack to make my eyes look red, that it may be thought I have wept, for I must speak in passion, and I will do it in King Cambyses' vein.

Stand aside, nobility. O Jesu, this is excellent sport, i' faith! Weep not, sweet queen, for trickling tears are vain.

O, the father, how he holds his countenance! For God's sake, lords, convey my tristful queen, For tears do stop the flood-gates of her eyes.

O Jesu, he doth it as like one of these harlotry players as ever I see! Peace, good pint-pot, peace, good tickle-brain.

That thou art my son, I have partly thy mother's word, partly my own opinion, but chiefly a villanous trick of thine eye and a foolish-hanging of thy nether lip, that doth warrant me.

If then thou be son to me, here lies the point, why, being son to me, art thou so pointed at? Shall the blessed sun of heaven prove a micher and eat blackberries? a question not to be asked.

Shall the sun of England prove a thief and take purses? a question to be asked.

If then the tree may be known by the fruit, as the fruit by the tree, then, peremptorily I speak it, there is virtue in that Falstaff: him keep with, the rest banish.

And tell me now, thou naughty varlet, tell me, where hast thou been this month? Dost thou speak like a king? Do thou stand for me, and I'll play my father.

Depose me? if thou dost it half so gravely, so majestically, both in word and matter, hang me up by the heels for a rabbit-sucker or a poulter's hare.

Now, Harry, whence come you? My noble lord, from Eastcheap.

'Sblood, my lord, they are false: nay, I'll tickle ye for a young prince, i' faith.

Swearest thou, ungracious boy? henceforth ne'er look on me.

Thou art violently carried away from grace: there is a devil haunts thee in the likeness of an old fat man, a tun of man is thy companion.

But to say I know more harm in him than in myself, were to say more than I know.

That he is old, the more the pity, his white hairs do witness it, but that he is, saving your reverence, a whoremaster, that I utterly deny.

If sack and sugar be a fault, God help the wicked! if to be old and merry be a sin, then many an old host that I know is damned: if to be fat be to be hated, then Pharaoh's lean kine are to be loved.

A knocking heard Re-enter BARDOLPH, running O, my lord, my lord! the sheriff with a most monstrous watch is at the door.

Out, ye rogue! Play out the play: I have much to say in the behalf of that Falstaff.

Re-enter the Hostess O Jesu, my lord, my lord! Heigh, heigh! the devil rides upon a fiddlestick: what's the matter? The sheriff and all the watch are at the door: they are come to search the house.

Shall I let them in? Dost thou hear, Hal? never call a true piece of gold a counterfeit: thou art essentially mad, without seeming so.

Go, hide thee behind the arras: the rest walk up above.

Now, my masters, for a true face and good Both which I have had: but their date is out, and therefore I'll hide me.

Now, master sheriff, what is your will with me? First, pardon me, my lord.

A hue and cry Hath follow'd certain men unto this house.

What men? One of them is well known, my gracious lord, A gross fat man.

The man, I do assure you, is not here, For I myself at this time have employ'd him.

There are two gentlemen Have in this robbery lost three hundred marks.

It may be so: if he have robb'd these men, He shall be answerable, and so farewell.

I think it is good morrow, is it not? Indeed, my lord, I think it be two o'clock.

Falstaff!--Fast asleep behind the arras, and snorting like a horse.

Search his pockets. He searcheth his pockets, and findeth certain papers What hast thou found? Nothing but papers, my lord.

O monstrous! but one half-penny-worth of bread to this intolerable deal of sack! What there is else, keep close, we'll read it at more advantage: there let him sleep till day.

We must all to the wars, and thy place shall be honourable.

I'll procure this fat rogue a charge of foot, and I know his death will be a march of twelve-score.

The money shall be paid back again with advantage.

Be with me betimes in the morning, and so, good morrow, Peto.

These promises are fair, the parties sure, And our induction full of prosperous hope.

Lord Mortimer, and cousin Glendower, Will you sit down? And uncle Worcester: a plague upon it! I have forgot the map.

Sit, cousin Percy, sit, good cousin Hotspur, For by that name as oft as Lancaster Doth speak of you, his cheek looks pale and with A rising sigh he wisheth you in heaven.

And you in hell, as oft as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.

I cannot blame him: at my nativity The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes, Of burning cressets, and at my birth The frame and huge foundation of the earth Shaked like a coward.

Why, so it would have done at the same season, if your mother's cat had but kittened, though yourself had never been born.

And I say the earth was not of my mind, If you suppose as fearing you it shook.

The heavens were all on fire, the earth did tremble.

O, then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire, And not in fear of your nativity.

At your birth Our grandam earth, having this distemperature, In passion shook.

Cousin, of many men I do not bear these crossings.

Give me leave To tell you once again that at my birth The front of heaven was full of fiery shapes, The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds Were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields.

These signs have mark'd me extraordinary, And all the courses of my life do show I am not in the roll of common men.

Why, so can I, or so can any man, But will they come when you do call for them? Why, I can teach you, cousin, to command The devil.

And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil By telling truth: tell truth and shame the devil.

If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither, And I'll be sworn I have power to shame him hence.

O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil! Come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.

Three times hath Henry Bolingbroke made head Against my power, thrice from the banks of Wye And sandy-bottom'd Severn have I sent him Bootless home and weather-beaten back.

My father Glendower is not ready yet, Not shall we need his help these fourteen days.

Within that space you may have drawn together Your tenants, friends and neighbouring gentlemen.

Yea, but Mark how he bears his course, and runs me up With like advantage on the other side, Gelding the opposed continent as much As on the other side it takes from you.

Yea, but a little charge will trench him here And on this north side win this cape of land, And then he runs straight and even.

Let me not understand you, then, speak it in Welsh.

I do not care: I'll give thrice so much land To any well-deserving friend, But in the way of bargain, mark ye me, I'll cavil on the ninth part of a hair.

I tell you what, He held me last night at least nine hours In reckoning up the several devils' names That were his lackeys: I cried 'hum,' and 'well, go to,' But mark'd him not a word.

In faith, he is a worthy gentleman, Exceedingly well read, and profited In strange concealments, valiant as a lion And as wondrous affable and as bountiful As mines of India.

In faith, my lord, you are too wilful-blame, And since your coming hither have done enough To put him quite beside his patience.

Well, I am school'd: good manners be your speed! Here come our wives, and let us take our leave.

Re-enter GLENDOWER with the ladies This is the deadly spite that angers me, My wife can speak no English, I no Welsh.

My daughter weeps: she will not part with you, She'll be a soldier too, she'll to the wars.

Good father, tell her that she and my aunt Percy Shall follow in your conduct speedily.

Glendower speaks to her in Welsh, and she answers him in the same She is desperate here, a peevish self-wind harlotry, one that no persuasion can do good upon.

The lady speaks in Welsh I understand thy looks: that pretty Welsh Which thou pour'st down from these swelling heavens I am too perfect in, and, but for shame, In such a parley should I answer thee.

Come, Kate, thou art perfect in lying down: come, quick, quick, that I may lay my head in thy lap.

The music plays Now I perceive the devil understands Welsh, And 'tis no marvel he is so humorous.

Then should you be nothing but musical for you are altogether governed by humours.

Lie still, ye thief, and hear the lady sing in Welsh.

Here the lady sings a Welsh song Come, Kate, I'll have your song too.

Not yours, in good sooth! Heart! you swear like a comfit-maker's wife.

'Not you, in good sooth,' and 'as true as I live,' and 'as God shall mend me,' and 'as sure as day,' And givest such sarcenet surety for thy oaths, As if thou never walk'st further than Finsbury.

Swear me, Kate, like a lady as thou art, A good mouth-filling oath, and leave 'in sooth,' And such protest of pepper-gingerbread, To velvet-guards and Sunday-citizens.

'Tis the next way to turn tailor, or be red-breast teacher.

An the indentures be drawn, I'll away within these two hours, and so, come in when ye will.

Come, come, Lord Mortimer, you are as slow As hot Lord Percy is on fire to go.

By this our book is drawn, we'll but seal, And then to horse immediately.

Lords, give us leave, the Prince of Wales and I Must have some private conference, but be near at hand, For we shall presently have need of you.

God pardon thee! yet let me wonder, Harry, At thy affections, which do hold a wing Quite from the flight of all thy ancestors.

Thus did I keep my person fresh and new, My presence, like a robe pontifical, Ne'er seen but wonder'd at: and so my state, Seldom but sumptuous, showed like a feast And won by rareness such solemnity.

I shall hereafter, my thrice gracious lord, Be more myself.

For all the world As thou art to this hour was Richard then When I from France set foot at Ravenspurgh, And even as I was then is Percy now.

And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland, The Archbishop's grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer, Capitulate against us and are up.

A hundred thousand rebels die in this: Thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.

Our hands are full of business: let's away, Advantage feeds him fat, while men delay.

Well, I'll repent, and that suddenly, while I am in some liking, I shall be out of heart shortly, and then I shall have no strength to repent.

An I have not forgotten what the inside of a church is made of, I am a peppercorn, a brewer's horse: the inside of a church! Company, villanous company, hath been the spoil of me.

Sir John, you are so fretful, you cannot live long.

Why, there is it: come sing me a bawdy song, make me merry.

Why, you are so fat, Sir John, that you must needs be out of all compass, out of all reasonable compass, Sir John.

Do thou amend thy face, and I'll amend my life: thou art our admiral, thou bearest the lantern in the poop, but 'tis in the nose of thee, thou art the Knight of the Burning Lamp.

When thou rannest up Gadshill in the night to catch my horse, if I did not think thou hadst been an ignis fatuus or a ball of wildfire, there's no purchase in money.

Ye lie, hostess: Bardolph was shaved and lost many a hair, and I'll be sworn my pocket was picked.

Who, I? no, I defy thee: God's light, I was never called so in mine own house before.

I know you, Sir John: you owe me money, Sir John, and now you pick a quarrel to beguile me of it: I bought you a dozen of shirts to your back.

Dowlas, filthy dowlas: I have given them away to bakers' wives, and they have made bolters of them.

Now, as I am a true woman, holland of eight shillings an ell.

You owe money here besides, Sir John, for your diet and by-drinkings, and money lent you, four and twenty pound.

How! poor? look upon his face, what call you rich? let them coin his nose, let them coin his cheeks: Ill not pay a denier.

What, will you make a younker of me? shall I not take mine case in mine inn but I shall have my pocket picked? I have lost a seal-ring of my grandfather's worth forty mark.

O Jesu, I have heard the prince tell him, I know not how oft, that ring was copper! How! the prince is a Jack, a sneak-cup: 'sblood, an he were here, I would cudgel him like a dog, if he would say so.

How now, lad! is the wind in that door, i' faith? must we all march? Yea, two and two, Newgate fashion.

What sayest thou, Mistress Quickly? How doth thy husband? I love him well, he is an honest man.

What sayest thou, Jack? The other night I fell asleep here behind the arras and had my pocket picked: this house is turned bawdy-house, they pick pockets.

What didst thou lose, Jack? Wilt thou believe me, Hal? three or four bonds of forty pound apiece, and a seal-ring of my A trifle, some eight-penny matter.

So I told him, my lord, and I said I heard your grace say so: and, my lord, he speaks most vilely of you, like a foul-mouthed man as he is, and said he would cudgel you.

What! he did not? There's neither faith, truth, nor womanhood in me else.

There's no more faith in thee than in a stewed prune, nor no more truth in thee than in a drawn fox, and for womanhood, Maid Marian may be the deputy's wife of the ward to thee.

Go, you thing, Say, what thing? what thing? What thing! why, a thing to thank God on.

I am no thing to thank God on, I would thou shouldst know it, I am an honest man's wife: and, setting thy knighthood aside, thou art a knave to call me so.

Setting thy womanhood aside, thou art a beast to say Say, what beast, thou knave, thou? What beast! why, an otter.

An otter, Sir John! Why an otter? Why, she's neither fish nor flesh, a man knows not where to have her.

Thou art an unjust man in saying so: thou or any man knows where to have me, thou knave, thou! Thou sayest true, hostess, and he slanders thee most grossly.

So he doth you, my lord, and said this other day you ought him a thousand pound.

Sirrah, do I owe you a thousand pound? A thousand pound, Ha! a million: thy love is worth a million: thou owest me thy love.

Nay, my lord, he called you Jack, and said he would cudgel you.

I say 'tis copper: darest thou be as good as thy word now? Why, Hal, thou knowest, as thou art but man, I dare: but as thou art prince, I fear thee as I fear the roaring of a lion's whelp.

And why not as the lion? The king is to be feared as the lion: dost thou think I'll fear thee as I fear thy father? nay, an I do, I pray God my girdle break.

O, if it should, how would thy guts fall about thy knees! But, sirrah, there's no room for faith, truth, nor honesty in this bosom of thine, it is all filled up with guts and midriff.

You confess then, you picked my pocket? It appears so by the story.

Hostess, I forgive thee: go, make ready breakfast, love thy husband, look to thy servants, cherish thy guests: thou shalt find me tractable to any honest reason: thou seest I am pacified still.

Now Hal, to the news at court: for the robbery, lad, how is that answered? O, my sweet beef, I must still be good angel to thee: the money is paid back again.

O, I do not like that paying back, 'tis a double labour.

I am good friends with my father and may do any thing.

Rob me the exchequer the first thing thou doest, and do it with unwashed hands too.

Where shall I find one that can steal well? O for a fine thief, of the age of two and twenty or thereabouts! I am heinously unprovided.

Well, God be thanked for these rebels, they offend none but the virtuous: I laud them, I praise them.

My lord? Go bear this letter to Lord John of Lancaster, to my brother John, this to my Lord of Westmoreland.

Go, Peto, to horse, to horse, for thou and I have thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner time.

Jack, meet me to-morrow in the temple hall at two o'clock in the afternoon.

There shalt thou know thy charge, and there receive Money and order for their furniture.

The land is burning, Percy stands on high, And either we or they must lower lie.

By God, I cannot flatter, I do defy The tongues of soothers, but a braver place In my heart's love hath no man than yourself: Nay, task me to my word, approve me, lord.

Thou art the king of honour: No man so potent breathes upon the ground But I will beard him.

What letters hast thou there?--I can but thank you.

Letters from him! why comes he not himself? He cannot come, my lord, he is grievous sick.

'Zounds! how has he the leisure to be sick In such a rustling time? Who leads his power? Under whose government come they along? His letters bear his mind, not I, my lord.

I prithee, tell me, doth he keep his bed? He did, my lord, four days ere I set forth, And at the time of my departure thence He was much fear'd by his physicians.

I would the state of time had first been whole Ere he by sickness had been visited: His health was never better worth than now.

Sick now! droop now! this sickness doth infect The very life-blood of our enterprise, 'Tis catching hither, even to our camp.

Yet doth he give us bold advertisement, That with our small conjunction we should on, To see how fortune is disposed to us, For, as he writes, there is no quailing now.

Because the king is certainly possess'd Of all our purposes.

What say you to it? Your father's sickness is a maim to us.

'Faith, and so we should, Where now remains a sweet reversion: We may boldly spend upon the hope of what Is to come in: A comfort of retirement lives in this.

If that the devil and mischance look big Upon the maidenhead of our affairs.

As heart can think: there is not such a word Spoke of in Scotland as this term of fear.

The Earl of Westmoreland, seven thousand strong, Is marching hitherwards, with him Prince John.

No harm: what more? And further, I have learn'd, The king himself in person is set forth, Or hitherwards intended speedily, With strong and mighty preparation.

No more, no more: worse than the sun in March, This praise doth nourish agues.

Let them come: They come like sacrifices in their trim, And to the fire-eyed maid of smoky war All hot and bleeding will we offer them: The mailed Mars shall on his altar sit Up to the ears in blood.

I am on fire To hear this rich reprisal is so nigh And yet not ours.

Come, let me taste my horse, Who is to bear me like a thunderbolt Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales: Harry to Harry shall, hot horse to horse, Meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corse.

O that Glendower were come! There is more news: I learn'd in Worcester, as I rode along, He cannot draw his power this fourteen days.

What may the king's whole battle reach unto? To thirty thousand.

Forty let it be: My father and Glendower being both away, The powers of us may serve so great a day Come, let us take a muster speedily: Doomsday is near, die all, die merrily.

Talk not of dying: I am out of fear Of death or death's hand for this one-half year.

Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry, fill me a bottle of sack: our soldiers shall march through, we'll to Sutton Co'fil' tonight.

Will you give me money, captain? Lay out, lay out.

An if it do, take it for thy labour, and if it make twenty, take them all, I'll answer the coinage.

If I be not ashamed of my soldiers, I am a soused gurnet.

I have misused the king's press damnably. I have got, in exchange of a hundred and fifty soldiers, three hundred and odd pounds.

A mad fellow met me on the way and told me I had unloaded all the gibbets and pressed the dead bodies.

I'll not march through Coventry with them, that's flat: nay, and the villains march wide betwixt the legs, as if they had gyves on, for indeed I had the most of them out of prison.

But that's all one, they'll find linen enough on every hedge.

Faith, Sir John,'tis more than time that I were there, and you too, but my powers are there already.

The king, I can tell you, looks for us all: we must away all night.

Tut, never fear me: I am as vigilant as a cat to steal cream.

I think, to steal cream indeed, for thy theft hath already made thee butter.

But tell me, Jack, whose fellows are these that come after? Mine, Hal, mine.

Tut, tut, good enough to toss, food for powder, food for powder, they'll fill a pit as well as better: tush, man, mortal men, mortal men.

Ay, but, Sir John, methinks they are exceeding poor and bare, too beggarly.

'Faith, for their poverty, I know not where they had that, and for their bareness, I am sure they never learned that of me.

No I'll be sworn, unless you call three fingers on the ribs bare.

But, sirrah, make haste: Percy is already in the field.

What, is the king encamped? He is, Sir John: I fear we shall stay too long.

To the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feast Fits a dull fighter and a keen guest.

Why say you so? looks he not for supply? So do we.

You do not counsel well: You speak it out of fear and cold heart.

So are the horses of the enemy In general, journey-bated and brought low: The better part of ours are full of rest.

The number of the king exceedeth ours: For God's sake.

cousin, stay till all come in. The trumpet sounds a parley I come with gracious offers from the king, if you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.

And God defend but still I should stand so, So long as out of limit and true rule You stand against anointed majesty.

The king hath sent to know The nature of your griefs, and whereupon You conjure from the breast of civil peace Such bold hostility, teaching his duteous land Audacious cruelty.

The king is kind, and well we know the king Knows at what time to promise, when to pay.

Shall I return this answer to the king? Not so, Sir Walter: we'll withdraw awhile.

Go to the king, and let there be impawn'd Some surety for a safe return again, And in the morning early shall my uncle Bring him our purposes: and so farewell.

Hie, good Sir Michael, bear this sealed brief With winged haste to the lord marshal, This to my cousin Scroop, and all the rest To whom they are directed.

If you knew How much they do to import, you would make haste.

Why, my good lord, you need not fear, There is Douglas and Lord Mortimer.

But there is Mordake, Vernon, Lord Harry Percy, And there is my Lord of Worcester and a head Of gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.

I must go write again To other friends, and so farewell, Sir Michael.

How bloodily the sun begins to peer Above yon busky hill! the day looks pale At his distemperature.

The southern wind Doth play the trumpet to his purposes, And by his hollow whistling in the leaves Foretells a tempest and a blustering day.

Then with the losers let it sympathize, For nothing can seem foul to those that win.

The trumpet sounds How now, my Lord of Worcester! 'tis not well That you and I should meet upon such terms As now we meet.

You have deceived our trust, And made us doff our easy robes of peace, To crush our old limbs in ungentle steel: This is not well, my lord, this is not well.

You have not sought it! how comes it, then? Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.

Peace, chewet, peace! It pleased your majesty to turn your looks Of favour from myself and all our house, And yet I must remember you, my lord, We were the first and dearest of your friends.

It was myself, my brother and his son, That brought you home and boldly did outdare The dangers of the time.

In both your armies there is many a soul Shall pay full dearly for this encounter, If once they join in trial.

And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee, Albeit considerations infinite Do make against it.

So, be gone, We will not now be troubled with reply: We offer fair, take it advisedly.

It will not be accepted, on my life: The Douglas and the Hotspur both together Are confident against the world in arms.

Nothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship.

'Tis not due yet, I would be loath to pay him before his day.

What need I be so forward with him that calls not on me? Well, 'tis no matter, honour pricks me on.

Yea, but how if honour prick me off when I come on? how then? Can honour set to a leg? no: or an arm? no: or take away the grief of a wound? no.

What is in that word honour? what is that honour? air.

A trim reckoning! Who hath it? he that died o' Wednesday.

Why? detraction will not suffer it. Therefore I'll none of it.

Honour is a mere scutcheon: and so ends my catechism.

O, no, my nephew must not know, Sir Richard, The liberal and kind offer of the king.

Look how we can, or sad or merrily, Interpretation will misquote our looks, And we shall feed like oxen at a stall, The better cherish'd, still the nearer death.

Therefore, good cousin, let not Harry know, In any case, the offer of the king.

My uncle is return'd: Deliver up my Lord of Westmoreland.

Uncle, what news? The king will bid you battle presently.

The Prince of Wales stepp'd forth before the king, And, nephew, challenged you to single fight.

There did he pause: but let me tell the world, If he outlive the envy of this day, England did never owe so sweet a hope, So much misconstrued in his wantonness.

Cousin, I think thou art enamoured On his follies: never did I hear Of any prince so wild a libertine.

But be he as he will, yet once ere night I will embrace him with a soldier's arm, That he shall shrink under my courtesy.

Arm, arm with speed: and, fellows, soldiers, friends, Better consider what you have to do Than I, that have not well the gift of tongue, Can lift your blood up with persuasion.

O gentlemen, the time of life is short! To spend that shortness basely were too long, If life did ride upon a dial's point, Still ending at the arrival of an hour.

An if we live, we live to tread on kings, If die, brave death, when princes die with us! Now, for our consciences, the arms are fair, When the intent of bearing them is just.

Sound all the lofty instruments of war, And by that music let us all embrace, For, heaven to earth, some of us never shall A second time do such a courtesy.

They embrace, and exeunt KING HENRY enters with his power.

The Lord of Stafford dear to-day hath bought Thy likeness, for instead of thee, King Harry, This sword hath ended him: so shall it thee, Unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.

I was not born a yielder, thou proud Scot, And thou shalt find a king that will revenge Lord Stafford's death.

DOUGLAS kills SIR WALTER BLUNT. Enter HOTSPUR O Douglas, hadst thou fought at Holmedon thus, never had triumph'd upon a Scot.

All's done, all's won, here breathless lies the king.

This, Douglas? no: I know this face full well: A gallant knight he was, his name was Blunt, Semblably furnish'd like the king himself.

A fool go with thy soul, whither it goes! A borrow'd title hast thou bought too dear: Why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king? The king hath many marching in his coats.

Now, by my sword, I will kill all his coats, I'll murder all his wardrobe, piece by piece, Until I meet the king.

Up, and away! Our soldiers stand full fairly for the day.

Enter FALSTAFF, solus Though I could 'scape shot-free at London, I fear the shot here, here's no scoring but upon the pate.

Soft! who are you? Sir Walter Blunt: there's honour for you! here's no vanity! I am as hot as moulten lead, and as heavy too: God keep lead out of me! I need no more weight than mine own bowels.

I have led my ragamuffins where they are peppered: there's not three of my hundred and fifty left alive, and they are for the town's end, to beg during life.

O Hal, I prithee, give me leave to breathe awhile.

Turk Gregory never did such deeds in arms as I have done this day.

I have paid Percy, I have made him sure. He is, indeed, and living to kill thee.

Nay, before God, Hal, if Percy be alive, thou get'st not my sword, but take my pistol, if thou wilt.

Give it to me: what, is it in the case? Ay, Hal, 'tis hot, 'tis hot, there's that will sack a city.

PRINCE HENRY draws it out, and finds it to be a bottle of sack What, is it a time to jest and dally now? He throws the bottle at him.

If he do come in my way, so: if he do not, if I come in his willingly, let him make a carbonado of me.

I like not such grinning honour as Sir Walter hath: give me life: which if I can save, so, if not, honour comes unlooked for, and there's an end.

Excursions. Enter PRINCE HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, and EARL OF WESTMORELAND I prithee, Harry, withdraw thyself, thou bleed'st too much.

I beseech your majesty, make up, Lest your retirement do amaze your friends.

By God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster, I did not think thee lord of such a spirit: Before, I loved thee as a brother, John, But now, I do respect thee as my soul.

I saw him hold Lord Percy at the point With lustier maintenance than I did look for Of such an ungrown warrior.

I have two boys Seek Percy and thyself about the field: But, seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily, I will assay thee: so, defend thyself.

I fear thou art another counterfeit, And yet, in faith, thou bear'st thee like a king: But mine I am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be, And thus I win thee.

They fight: DOUGLAS flies Cheerly, my lord	how fares your grace? Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent, And so hath Clifton: I'll to Clifton straight.

Stay, and breathe awhile: Thou hast redeem'd thy lost opinion, And show'd thou makest some tender of my life, In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.

O God! they did me too much injury That ever said I hearken'd for your death.

They fight Well said, Hal! to it Hal! Nay, you shall find no boy's play here, I can tell you.

Re-enter DOUGLAS, he fights with FALSTAFF,  who falls down as if he were dead, and exit DOUGLAS.

Embowell'd will I see thee by and by: Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.

I'll give you leave to powder me and eat me too to-morrow.

'Sblood,'twas time to counterfeit, or that hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too.

The better part of valour is discretion, in the which better part I have saved my life.

Zounds, I am afraid of this gunpowder Percy, though he be dead: how, if he should counterfeit too and rise? by my faith, I am afraid he would prove the better counterfeit.

Therefore I'll make him sure, yea, and I'll swear I killed him.

Why may not he rise as well as I? Nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me.

Therefore, sirrah, Stabbing him with a new wound in your thigh, come you along with me.

Takes up HOTSPUR on his back Re-enter PRINCE HENRY and LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER Come, brother John, full bravely hast thou flesh'd Thy maiden sword.

But, soft! whom have we here? Did you not tell me this fat man was dead? I did, I saw him dead, Breathless and bleeding on the ground.

Art thou alive? Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight? I prithee, speak, we will not trust our eyes Without our ears: thou art not what thou seem'st.

No, that's certain, I am not a double man: but if I be not Jack Falstaff, then am I a Jack.

There is Percy: Throwing the body down if your father will do me any honour, so, if not, let him kill the next Percy himself.

I look to be either earl or duke, I can assure you.

Didst thou? Lord, Lord, how this world is given to lying! I grant you I was down and out of breath, and so was he: but we rose both at an instant and fought a long hour by Shrewsbury clock.

If I may be believed, so, if not, let them that should reward valour bear the sin upon their own heads.

I'll take it upon my death, I gave him this wound in the thigh: if the man were alive and would deny it, 'zounds, I would make him eat a piece of my sword.

Come, bring your luggage nobly on your back: For my part, if a lie may do thee grace, I'll gild it with the happiest terms I have.

A retreat is sounded The trumpet sounds retreat, the day is ours.

Come, brother, let us to the highest of the field, To see what friends are living, who are dead.

He that rewards me, God reward him! If I do grow great, I'll grow less, for I'll purge, and leave sack, and live cleanly as a nobleman should do.

Enter KING HENRY IV, PRINCE  HENRY, LORD JOHN LANCASTER, EARL OF WESTMORELAND, with WORCESTER and VERNON prisoners Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke.

What I have done my safety urged me to, And I embrace this fortune patiently, Since not to be avoided it falls on me.

Bear Worcester to the death and Vernon too: Other offenders we will pause upon.

At my tent The Douglas is, and I beseech your grace I may dispose of him.

I thank your grace for this high courtesy, Which I shall give away immediately.

Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway, Meeting the cheque of such another day: And since this business so fair is done, Let us not leave till all our own be won.

What should I say? his deeds exceed all speech: He ne'er lift up his hand but conquered.

Unto the French the dreadful judgement-day So dreadful will not be as was his sight.

The battles of the Lord of hosts he fought: The church's prayers made him so prosperous.

The church! where is it? Had not churchmen pray'd, His thread of life had not so soon decay'd: None do you like but an effeminate prince, Whom, like a school-boy, you may over-awe.

Gloucester, whate'er we like, thou art protector And lookest to command the prince and realm.

Thy wife is proud, she holdeth thee in awe, More than God or religious churchmen may.

Name not religion, for thou lovest the flesh, And ne'er throughout the year to church thou go'st Except it be to pray against thy foes.

Cease, cease these jars and rest your minds in peace: Let's to the altar: heralds, wait on us: Instead of gold, we'll offer up our arms: Since arms avail not now that Henry's dead.

Posterity, await for wretched years, When at their mothers' moist eyes babes shall suck, Our isle be made a nourish of salt tears, And none but women left to wail the dead.

What say'st thou, man, before dead Henry's corse? Speak softly, or the loss of those great towns Will make him burst his lead and rise from death.

Is Paris lost? is Rouen yielded up? If Henry were recall'd to life again, These news would cause him once more yield the ghost.

How were they lost? what treachery was used? No treachery, but want of men and money.

Awake, awake, English nobility! Let not sloth dim your horrors new-begot: Cropp'd are the flower-de-luces in your arms, Of England's coat one half is cut away.

Were our tears wanting to this funeral, These tidings would call forth their flowing tides.

I'll fight for France. Away with these disgraceful wailing robes! Wounds will I lend the French instead of eyes, To weep their intermissive miseries.

The Dauphin crowned king! all fly to him! O, whither shall we fly from this reproach? We will not fly, but to our enemies' throats.

Gloucester, why doubt'st thou of my forwardness? An army have I muster'd in my thoughts, Wherewith already France is overrun.

My gracious lords, to add to your laments, Wherewith you now bedew King Henry's hearse, I must inform you of a dismal fight Betwixt the stout Lord Talbot and the French.

What! wherein Talbot overcame? is't so? O, no, wherein Lord Talbot was o'erthrown: The circumstance I'll tell you more at large.

The tenth of August last this dreadful lord, Retiring from the siege of Orleans, Having full scarce six thousand in his troop.

By three and twenty thousand of the French Was round encompassed and set upon.

Is Talbot slain? then I will slay myself, For living idly here in pomp and ease, Whilst such a worthy leader, wanting aid, Unto his dastard foemen is betray'd.

O no, he lives, but is took prisoner, And Lord Scales with him and Lord Hungerford: Most of the rest slaughter'd or took likewise.

His ransom there is none but I shall pay: I'll hale the Dauphin headlong from his throne: His crown shall be the ransom of my friend, Four of their lords I'll change for one of ours.

Remember, lords, your oaths to Henry sworn, Either to quell the Dauphin utterly, Or bring him in obedience to your yoke.

I do remember it, and here take my leave, To go about my preparation.

I'll to the Tower with all the haste I can, To view the artillery and munition, And then I will proclaim young Henry king.

To Eltham will I, where the young king is, Being ordain'd his special governor, And for his safety there I'll best devise.

Each hath his place and function to attend: I am left out, for me nothing remains.

But long I will not be Jack out of office: The king from Eltham I intend to steal And sit at chiefest stern of public weal.

What towns of any moment but we have? At pleasure here we lie near Orleans, Otherwhiles the famish'd English, like pale ghosts, Faintly besiege us one hour in a month.

They want their porridge and their fat bull-beeves: Either they must be dieted like mules And have their provender tied to their mouths Or piteous they will look, like drowned mice.

Now for the honour of the forlorn French! Him I forgive my death that killeth me When he sees me go back one foot or fly.

Here alarum, they are beaten back by the English with great loss.

Re-enter CHARLES, ALENCON, and REIGNIER Who ever saw the like? what men have I! Dogs! cowards! dastards! I would ne'er have fled, But that they left me 'midst my enemies.

Salisbury is a desperate homicide, He fighteth as one weary of his life.

The other lords, like lions wanting food, Do rush upon us as their hungry prey.

Froissart, a countryman of ours, records, England all Olivers and Rowlands bred, During the time Edward the Third did reign.

More truly now may this be verified, For none but Samsons and Goliases It sendeth forth to skirmish.

I think, by some odd gimmors or device Their arms are set like clocks, stiff to strike on, Else ne'er could they hold out so as they do.

The spirit of deep prophecy she hath, Exceeding the nine sibyls of old Rome: What's past and what's to come she can descry.

Speak, shall I call her in? Believe my words, For they are certain and unfallible.

But first, to try her skill, Reignier, stand thou as Dauphin in my place: Question her proudly, let thy looks be stern: By this means shall we sound what skill she hath.

Be not amazed, there's nothing hid from me: In private will I talk with thee apart.

Dauphin, I am by birth a shepherd's daughter, My wit untrain'd in any kind of art.

Ask me what question thou canst possible, And I will answer unpremeditated: My courage try by combat, if thou darest, And thou shalt find that I exceed my sex.

Resolve on this, thou shalt be fortunate, If thou receive me for thy warlike mate.

I am prepared: here is my keen-edged sword, Deck'd with five flower-de-luces on each side, The which at Touraine, in Saint Katharine's Out of a great deal of old iron I chose forth.

Here they fight, and JOAN LA PUCELLE overcomes Stay, stay thy hands! thou art an Amazon And fightest with the sword of Deborah.

Whoe'er helps thee, 'tis thou that must help me: Impatiently I burn with thy desire, My heart and hands thou hast at once subdued.

Excellent Pucelle, if thy name be so, Let me thy servant and not sovereign be: 'Tis the French Dauphin sueth to thee thus.

I must not yield to any rites of love, For my profession's sacred from above: When I have chased all thy foes from hence, Then will I think upon a recompense.

Doubtless he shrives this woman to her smock, Else ne'er could he so long protract his speech.

Shall we disturb him, since he keeps no mean? He may mean more than we poor men do know: These women are shrewd tempters with their tongues.

My lord, where are you? what devise you on? Shall we give over Orleans, or no? Why, no, I say, distrustful recreants! Fight till the last gasp, I will be your guard.

This night the siege assuredly I'll raise: Expect Saint Martin's summer, halcyon days, Since I have entered into these wars.

Glory is like a circle in the water, Which never ceaseth to enlarge itself Till by broad spreading it disperse to nought.

With Henry's death the English circle ends, Dispersed are the glories it included.

Now am I like that proud insulting ship Which Caesar and his fortune bare at once.

Was Mahomet inspired with a dove? Thou with an eagle art inspired then.

Helen, the mother of great Constantine, Nor yet Saint Philip's daughters, were like thee.

Bright star of Venus, fall'n down on the earth, How may I reverently worship thee enough? Leave off delays, and let us raise the siege.

Woman, do what thou canst to save our honours, Drive them from Orleans and be immortalized.

Presently we'll try: come, let's away about it: No prophet will I trust, if she prove false.

I am come to survey the Tower this day: Since Henry's death, I fear, there is conveyance.

Where be these warders, that they wait not here? Open the gates, 'tis Gloucester that calls.

First Serving-Man	It is the noble Duke of Gloucester.

First Serving-Man	Villains, answer you so the lord protector? We do no otherwise than we are will'd.

Who willed you? or whose will stands but mine? There's none protector of the realm but I.

Have patience, noble duke, I may not open, The Cardinal of Winchester forbids: From him I have express commandment That thou nor none of thine shall be let in.

Serving-Men	Open the gates unto the lord protector, Or we'll burst them open, if that you come not quickly.

How now, ambitious Humphry! what means this? Peel'd priest, dost thou command me to be shut out? I do, thou most usurping proditor, And not protector, of the king or realm.

Nay, stand thou back, I will not budge a foot: This be Damascus, be thou cursed Cain, To slay thy brother Abel, if thou wilt.

I will not slay thee, but I'll drive thee back: Thy scarlet robes as a child's bearing-cloth I'll use to carry thee out of this place.

What! am I dared and bearded to my face? Draw, men, for all this privileged place, Blue coats to tawny coats.

Priest, beware your beard, I mean to tug it and to cuff you soundly: Under my feet I stamp thy cardinal's hat: In spite of pope or dignities of church, Here by the cheeks I'll drag thee up and down.

Gloucester, thou wilt answer this before the pope.

Winchester goose, I cry, a rope! a rope! Now beat them hence, why do you let them stay? Thee I'll chase hence, thou wolf in sheep's array.

Cardinal, I'll be no breaker of the law: But we shall meet, and break our minds at large.

Gloucester, we will meet, to thy cost, be sure: Thy heart-blood I will have for this day's work.

Abominable Gloucester, guard thy head, For I intend to have it ere long.

Good God, these nobles should such stomachs bear! I myself fight not once in forty year.

Master-Gunner	Sirrah, thou know'st how Orleans is besieged, And how the English have the suburbs won.

Father, I know, and oft have shot at them, Howe'er unfortunate I miss'd my aim.

Be thou ruled by me: Chief master-gunner am I of this town, Something I must do to procure me grace.

To intercept this inconvenience, A piece of ordnance 'gainst it I have placed, And even these three days have I watch'd, If I could see them.

If thou spy'st any, run and bring me word, And thou shalt find me at the governor's.

Father, I warrant you, take you no care, I'll never trouble you, if I may spy them.

Talbot, my life, my joy, again return'd! How wert thou handled being prisoner? Or by what means got'st thou to be released? Discourse, I prithee, on this turret's top.

The Duke of Bedford had a prisoner Call'd the brave Lord Ponton de Santrailles, For him was I exchanged and ransomed.

But with a baser man of arms by far Once in contempt they would have barter'd me: Which I, disdaining, scorn'd, and craved death, Rather than I would be so vile esteem'd.

But, O! the treacherous Fastolfe wounds my heart, Whom with my bare fists I would execute, If I now had him brought into my power.

In open market-place produced they me, To be a public spectacle to all: Here, said they, is the terror of the French, The scarecrow that affrights our children so.

Sir Thomas Gargrave, and Sir William Glansdale, Let me have your express opinions Where is best place to make our battery next.

I think, at the north gate, for there stand lords.

For aught I see, this city must be famish'd, Or with light skirmishes enfeebled.

Yet livest thou, Salisbury? though thy speech doth fail, One eye thou hast, to look to heaven for grace: The sun with one eye vieweth all the world.

Heaven, be thou gracious to none alive, If Salisbury wants mercy at thy hands! Bear hence his body, I will help to bury it.

Sir Thomas Gargrave, hast thou any life? Speak unto Talbot, nay, look up to him.

Salisbury, cheer thy spirit with this comfort, Thou shalt not die whiles-- He beckons with his hand and smiles on me.

As who should say 'When I am dead and gone, Remember to avenge me on the French.

Plantagenet, I will, and like thee, Nero, Play on the lute, beholding the towns burn: Wretched shall France be only in my name.

Here SALISBURY lifteth himself up and groans Hear, hear how dying Salisbury doth groan! It irks his heart he cannot be revenged.

Frenchmen, I'll be a Salisbury to you: Pucelle or puzzel, dolphin or dogfish, Your hearts I'll stamp out with my horse's heels, And make a quagmire of your mingled brains.

Convey me Salisbury into his tent, And then we'll try what these dastard Frenchmen dare.

I'll have a bout with thee, Devil or devil's dam, I'll conjure thee: Blood will I draw on thee, thou art a witch, And straightway give thy soul to him thou servest.

Here they fight Heavens, can you suffer hell so to prevail? My breast I'll burst with straining of my courage And from my shoulders crack my arms asunder.

They fight again Talbot, farewell, thy hour is not yet come: I must go victual Orleans forthwith.

A short alarum, then enter the town with soldiers O'ertake me, if thou canst, I scorn thy strength.

Go, go, cheer up thy hungry-starved men, Help Salisbury to make his testament: This day is ours, as many more shall be.

They call'd us for our fierceness English dogs, Now, like to whelps, we crying run away.

Here another skirmish It will not be: retire into your trenches: You all consented unto Salisbury's death, For none would strike a stroke in his revenge.

Pucelle is enter'd into Orleans, In spite of us or aught that we could do.

O, would I were to die with Salisbury! The shame hereof will make me hide my head.

Advance our waving colours on the walls, Rescued is Orleans from the English Thus Joan la Pucelle hath perform'd her word.

Divinest creature, Astraea's daughter, How shall I honour thee for this success? Thy promises are like Adonis' gardens That one day bloom'd and fruitful were the next.

France, triumph in thy glorious prophetess! Recover'd is the town of Orleans: More blessed hap did ne'er befall our state.

Why ring not out the bells aloud throughout the town? Dauphin, command the citizens make bonfires And feast and banquet in the open streets, To celebrate the joy that God hath given us.

All France will be replete with mirth and joy, When they shall hear how we have play'd the men.

'Tis Joan, not we, by whom the day is won, For which I will divide my crown with her, And all the priests and friars in my realm Shall in procession sing her endless praise.

No longer on Saint Denis will we cry, But Joan la Pucelle shall be France's saint.

Come in, and let us banquet royally, After this golden day of victory.

Exeunt Sirs, take your places and be vigilant: If any noise or soldier you perceive Near to the walls, by some apparent sign Let us have knowledge at the court of guard.

Thus are poor servitors, When others sleep upon their quiet beds, Constrain'd to watch in darkness, rain and cold.

Coward of France! how much he wrongs his fame, Despairing of his own arm's fortitude, To join with witches and the help of hell! Traitors have never other company.

But what's that Pucelle whom they term so pure? A maid, they say.

A maid! and be so martial! Pray God she prove not masculine ere long, If underneath the standard of the French She carry armour as she hath begun.

Well, let them practise and converse with spirits: God is our fortress, in whose conquering name Let us resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks.

Not all together: better far, I guess, That we do make our entrance several ways, That, if it chance the one of us do fail, The other yet may rise against their force.

Now, Salisbury, for thee, and for the right Of English Henry, shall this night appear How much in duty I am bound to both.

George,' 'A Talbot.' The French leap over the walls in their shirts.

Enter, several ways, the BASTARD OF ORLEANS, ALENCON, and REIGNIER, half ready, and half unready How now, my lords! what, all unready so? Unready! ay, and glad we 'scaped so well.

'Twas time, I trow, to wake and leave our beds, Hearing alarums at our chamber-doors.

Of all exploits since first I follow'd arms, Ne'er heard I of a warlike enterprise More venturous or desperate than this.

Duke of Alencon, this was your default, That, being captain of the watch to-night, Did look no better to that weighty charge.

Had all your quarters been as safely kept As that whereof I had the government, We had not been thus shamefully surprised.

And now there rests no other shift but this, To gather our soldiers, scatter'd and dispersed, And lay new platforms to endamage them.

Enter an English Soldier, crying 'A  Talbot! a Talbot!' They fly, leaving their clothes behind I'll be so bold to take what they have left.

The cry of Talbot serves me for a sword, For I have loaden me with many spoils, Using no other weapon but his name.

The day begins to break, and night is fled, Whose pitchy mantle over-veil'd the earth.

Retreat sounded Bring forth the body of old Salisbury, And here advance it in the market-place, The middle centre of this cursed town.

Now have I paid my vow unto his soul, For every drop of blood was drawn from him, There hath at least five Frenchmen died tonight.

But, lords, in all our bloody massacre, I muse we met not with the Dauphin's grace, His new-come champion, virtuous Joan of Arc, Nor any of his false confederates.

'Tis thought, Lord Talbot, when the fight began, Roused on the sudden from their drowsy beds, They did amongst the troops of armed men Leap o'er the walls for refuge in the field.

After that things are set in order here, We'll follow them with all the power we have.

Is it even so? Nay, then, I see our wars Will turn unto a peaceful comic sport, When ladies crave to be encounter'd with.

Will not your honours bear me company? No, truly, it is more than manners will: And I have heard it said, unbidden guests Are often welcomest when they are gone.

Well then, alone, since there's no remedy, I mean to prove this lady's courtesy.

You perceive my mind? I do, my lord, and mean accordingly.

Porter, remember what I gave in charge, And when you have done so, bring the keys to me.

The plot is laid: if all things fall out right, I shall as famous be by this exploit As Scythian Tomyris by Cyrus' death.

Great is the rumor of this dreadful knight, And his achievements of no less account: Fain would mine eyes be witness with mine ears, To give their censure of these rare reports.

According as your ladyship desired, By message craved, so is Lord Talbot come.

Alas, this is a child, a silly dwarf! It cannot be this weak and writhled shrimp Should strike such terror to his enemies.

Madam, I have been bold to trouble you, But since your ladyship is not at leisure, I'll sort some other time to visit you.

Stay, my Lord Talbot, for my lady craves To know the cause of your abrupt departure.

Marry, for that she's in a wrong belief, I go to certify her Talbot's here.

Re-enter Porter with keys If thou be he, then art thou prisoner.

Prisoner! to whom? To me, blood-thirsty lord, And for that cause I trained thee to my house.

Ha, ha, ha! Laughest thou, wretch? thy mirth shall turn to moan.

I laugh to see your ladyship so fond To think that you have aught but Talbot's shadow Whereon to practise your severity.

This is a riddling merchant for the nonce, He will be here, and yet he is not here: How can these contrarieties agree? That will I show you presently.

Victorious Talbot! pardon my abuse: I find thou art no less than fame hath bruited And more than may be gather'd by thy shape.

Let my presumption not provoke thy wrath, For I am sorry that with reverence I did not entertain thee as thou art.

Be not dismay'd, fair lady, nor misconstrue The mind of Talbot, as you did mistake The outward composition of his body.

With all my heart, and think me honoured To feast so great a warrior in my house.

Great lords and gentlemen, what means this silence? Dare no man answer in a case of truth? Within the Temple-hall we were too loud, The garden here is more convenient.

Tut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance: The truth appears so naked on my side That any purblind eye may find it out.

And on my side it is so well apparell'd, So clear, so shining and so evident That it will glimmer through a blind man's eye.

Let him that is no coward nor no flatterer, But dare maintain the party of the truth, Pluck a red rose from off this thorn with me.

I love no colours, and without all colour Of base insinuating flattery I pluck this white rose with Plantagenet.

I pluck this red rose with young Somerset And say withal I think he held the right.

Stay, lords and gentlemen, and pluck no more, Till you conclude that he upon whose side The fewest roses are cropp'd from the tree Shall yield the other in the right opinion.

Good Master Vernon, it is well objected: If I have fewest, I subscribe in silence.

I pluck this pale and maiden blossom here, Giving my verdict on the white rose side.

Prick not your finger as you pluck it off, Lest bleeding you do paint the white rose red And fall on my side so, against your will.

If I my lord, for my opinion bleed, Opinion shall be surgeon to my hurt And keep me on the side where still I am.

Well, well, come on: who else? Unless my study and my books be false, The argument you held was wrong in you: To SOMERSET In sign whereof I pluck a white rose too.

Now, Somerset, where is your argument? Here in my scabbard, meditating that Shall dye your white rose in a bloody red.

Meantime your cheeks do counterfeit our roses, For pale they look with fear, as witnessing The truth on our side.

No, Plantagenet, 'Tis not for fear but anger that thy cheeks Blush for pure shame to counterfeit our roses, And yet thy tongue will not confess thy error.

Hath not thy rose a canker, Somerset? Hath not thy rose a thorn, Plantagenet? Ay, sharp and piercing, to maintain his truth, Whiles thy consuming canker eats his falsehood.

Well, I'll find friends to wear my bleeding roses, That shall maintain what I have said is true, Where false Plantagenet dare not be seen.

Now, by this maiden blossom in my hand, I scorn thee and thy fashion, peevish boy.

Away, away, good William de la Pole! We grace the yeoman by conversing with him.

By him that made me, I'll maintain my words On any plot of ground in Christendom.

My father was attached, not attainted, Condemn'd to die for treason, but no traitor, And that I'll prove on better men than Somerset, Were growing time once ripen'd to my will.

For your partaker Pole and you yourself, I'll note you in my book of memory, To scourge you for this apprehension: Look to it well and say you are well warn'd.

Ah, thou shalt find us ready for thee still, And know us by these colours for thy foes, For these my friends in spite of thee shall wear.

And, by my soul, this pale and angry rose, As cognizance of my blood-drinking hate, Will I for ever and my faction wear, Until it wither with me to my grave Or flourish to the height of my degree.

Go forward and be choked with thy ambition! And so farewell until I meet thee next.

Good Master Vernon, I am bound to you, That you on my behalf would pluck a flower.

Come, let us four to dinner: I dare say This quarrel will drink blood another day.

Kind keepers of my weak decaying age, Let dying Mortimer here rest himself.

Even like a man new haled from the rack, So fare my limbs with long imprisonment.

And these grey locks, the pursuivants of death, Nestor-like aged in an age of care, Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer.

But tell me, keeper, will my nephew come? Richard Plantagenet, my lord, will come: We sent unto the Temple, unto his chamber, And answer was return'd that he will come.

Richard Plantagenet, my friend, is he come? Ay, noble uncle, thus ignobly used, Your nephew, late despised Richard, comes.

Direct mine arms I may embrace his neck, And in his bosom spend my latter gasp: O, tell me when my lips do touch his cheeks, That I may kindly give one fainting kiss.

And now declare, sweet stem from York's great stock, Why didst thou say, of late thou wert despised? First, lean thine aged back against mine arm, And, in that ease, I'll tell thee my disease.

Therefore, good uncle, for my father's sake, In honour of a true Plantagenet And for alliance sake, declare the cause My father, Earl of Cambridge, lost his head.

That cause, fair nephew, that imprison'd me And hath detain'd me all my flowering youth Within a loathsome dungeon, there to pine, Was cursed instrument of his decease.

Discover more at large what cause that was, For I am ignorant and cannot guess.

I will, if that my fading breath permit And death approach not ere my tale be done.

But mark: as in this haughty attempt They laboured to plant the rightful heir, I lost my liberty and they their lives.

Thus the Mortimers, In whom the tide rested, were suppress'd.

True, and thou seest that I no issue have And that my fainting words do warrant death, Thou art my heir, the rest I wish thee gather: But yet be wary in thy studious care.

Thy grave admonishments prevail with me: But yet, methinks, my father's execution Was nothing less than bloody tyranny.

With silence, nephew, be thou politic: Strong-fixed is the house of Lancaster, And like a mountain, not to be removed.

But now thy uncle is removing hence: As princes do their courts, when they are cloy'd With long continuance in a settled place.

O, uncle, would some part of my young years Might but redeem the passage of your age! Thou dost then wrong me, as that slaughterer doth Which giveth many wounds when one will kill.

Well, I will lock his counsel in my breast, And what I do imagine let that rest.

Keepers, convey him hence, and I myself Will see his burial better than his life.

Presumptuous priest! this place commands my patience, Or thou shouldst find thou hast dishonour'd me.

Beside, I fear me, if thy thoughts were sifted, The king, thy sovereign, is not quite exempt From envious malice of thy swelling heart.

Lords, vouchsafe To give me hearing what I shall reply.

Unreverent Gloster! Thou art reverent Touching thy spiritual function, not thy life.

Methinks my lord should be religious And know the office that belongs to such.

Methinks his lordship should be humbler, it fitteth not a prelate so to plead.

Uncles of Gloucester and of Winchester, The special watchmen of our English weal, I would prevail, if prayers might prevail, To join your hearts in love and amity.

A noise within, 'Down with the tawny-coats!' What tumult's this? An uproar, I dare warrant, Begun through malice of the bishop's men.

We charge you, on allegiance to ourself, To hold your slaughtering hands and keep the peace.

First Serving-man	Nay, if we be forbidden stones, We'll fall to it with our teeth.

Second Serving-man	Do what ye dare, we are as resolute.

Skirmish again You of my household, leave this peevish broil And set this unaccustom'd fight aside.

First Serving-man	Ay, and the very parings of our nails Shall pitch a field when we are dead.

Begin again Stay, stay, I say! And if you love me, as you say you do, Let me persuade you to forbear awhile.

If holy churchmen take delight in broils? Yield, my lord protector, yield, Winchester, Except you mean with obstinate repulse To slay your sovereign and destroy the realm.

You see what mischief and what murder too Hath been enacted through your enmity, Then be at peace except ye thirst for blood.

Compassion on the king commands me stoop, Or I would see his heart out, ere the priest Should ever get that privilege of me.

For shame, my lord of Winchester, relent! What, shall a child instruct you what to do? Well, Duke of Gloucester, I will yield to thee, Love for thy love and hand for hand I give.

Third Serving-man	And I will see what physic the tavern affords.

Accept this scroll, most gracious sovereign, Which in the right of Richard Plantagenet We do exhibit to your majesty.

And those occasions, uncle, were of force: Therefore, my loving lords, our pleasure is That Richard be restored to his blood.

Let Richard be restored to his blood, So shall his father's wrongs be recompensed.

If Richard will be true, not that alone But all the whole inheritance I give That doth belong unto the house of York, From whence you spring by lineal descent.

Thy humble servant vows obedience And humble service till the point of death.

When Gloucester says the word, King Henry goes, For friendly counsel cuts off many foes.

Flourish. Exeunt all but EXETER Ay, we may march in England or in France, Not seeing what is likely to ensue.

If we have entrance, as I hope we shall, And that we find the slothful watch but weak, I'll by a sign give notice to our friends, That Charles the Dauphin may encounter them.

Our sacks shall be a mean to sack the city, And we be lords and rulers over Rouen, Therefore we'll knock.

Paysans, pauvres gens de France, Poor market folks that come to sell their corn.

Now, Rouen, I'll shake thy bulwarks to the ground.

Saint Denis bless this happy stratagem! And once again we'll sleep secure in Rouen.

Now shine it like a comet of revenge, A prophet to the fall of all our foes! Defer no time, delays have dangerous ends, And then do execution on the watch.

Enter TALBOT in an excursion France, thou shalt rue this treason with thy tears, If Talbot but survive thy treachery.

Pucelle, that witch, that damned sorceress, Hath wrought this hellish mischief unawares, That hardly we escaped the pride of France.

Are ye so hot, sir? yet, Pucelle, hold thy peace, If Talbot do but thunder, rain will follow.

I speak not to that railing Hecate, But unto thee, Alencon, and the rest, Will ye, like soldiers, come and fight it out? Signior, no.

Signior, hang! base muleters of France! Like peasant foot-boys do they keep the walls And dare not take up arms like gentlemen.

Away, captains! let's get us from the walls, For Talbot means no goodness by his looks.

God be wi' you, my lord! we came but to tell you That we are here.

But, ere we go, regard this dying prince, The valiant Duke of Bedford.

Come, my lord, We will bestow you in some better place, Fitter for sickness and for crazy age.

Lord Talbot, do not so dishonour me: Here will I sit before the walls of Rouen And will be partner of your weal or woe.

Undaunted spirit in a dying breast! Then be it so: heavens keep old Bedford safe! And now no more ado, brave Burgundy, But gather we our forces out of hand And set upon our boasting enemy.

Enter FASTOLFE and a Captain Whither away, Sir John Fastolfe, in such haste? Whither away! to save myself by flight: We are like to have the overthrow again.

What! will you fly, and leave Lord Talbot? All the Talbots in the world, to save my life! Cowardly knight! ill fortune follow thee! Retreat: excursions.

JOAN LA PUCELLE, ALENCON, and CHARLES fly Now, quiet soul, depart when heaven please, For I have seen our enemies' overthrow.

What is the trust or strength of foolish man? They that of late were daring with their scoffs Are glad and fain by flight to save themselves.

BEDFORD dies, and is carried in by two in his chair An alarum.

Now will we take some order in the town, Placing therein some expert officers, And then depart to Paris to the king, For there young Henry with his nobles lie.

Dismay not, princes, at this accident, Nor grieve that Rouen is so recovered: Care is no cure, but rather corrosive, For things that are not to be remedied.

Let frantic Talbot triumph for a while And like a peacock sweep along his tail, We'll pull his plumes and take away his train, If Dauphin and the rest will be but ruled.

We have been guided by thee hitherto, And of thy cunning had no diffidence: One sudden foil shall never breed distrust.

Search out thy wit for secret policies, And we will make thee famous through the world.

We'll set thy statue in some holy place, And have thee reverenced like a blessed saint: Employ thee then, sweet virgin, for our good.

Then thus it must be, this doth Joan devise: By fair persuasions mix'd with sugar'd words We will entice the Duke of Burgundy To leave the Talbot and to follow us.

Ay, marry, sweeting, if we could do that, France were no place for Henry's warriors, Nor should that nation boast it so with us, But be extirped from our provinces.

For ever should they be expulsed from France And not have title of an earldom here.

Your honours shall perceive how I will work To bring this matter to the wished end.

Drum sounds afar off Hark! by the sound of drum you may perceive Their powers are marching unto Paris-ward.

Enter, and pass over at a distance, TALBOT and his forces There goes the Talbot, with his colours spread, And all the troops of English after him.

Enter BURGUNDY and forces Now in the rearward comes the duke and his: Fortune in favour makes him lag behind.

Trumpets sound a parley A parley with the Duke of Burgundy! Who craves a parley with the Burgundy? The princely Charles of France, thy countryman.

What say'st thou, Charles? for I am marching hence.

Brave Burgundy, undoubted hope of France! Stay, let thy humble handmaid speak to thee.

Look on thy country, look on fertile France, And see the cities and the towns defaced By wasting ruin of the cruel foe.

O, turn thy edged sword another way, Strike those that hurt, and hurt not those that help.

One drop of blood drawn from thy country's bosom Should grieve thee more than streams of foreign gore: Return thee therefore with a flood of tears, And wash away thy country's stained spots.

Either she hath bewitch'd me with her words, Or nature makes me suddenly relent.

Besides, all French and France exclaims on thee, Doubting thy birth and lawful progeny.

See, then, thou fight'st against thy countrymen And joint'st with them will be thy slaughtermen.

Come, come, return, return, thou wandering lord: Charles and the rest will take thee in their arms.

I am vanquished, these haughty words of hers Have batter'd me like roaring cannon-shot, And made me almost yield upon my knees.

Forgive me, country, and sweet countrymen, And, lords, accept this hearty kind embrace: My forces and my power of men are yours: So farewell, Talbot, I'll no longer trust thee.

Welcome, brave duke! thy friendship makes us fresh.

Pucelle hath bravely play'd her part in this, And doth deserve a coronet of gold.

Now let us on, my lords, and join our powers, And seek how we may prejudice the foe.

Is this the Lord Talbot, uncle Gloucester, That hath so long been resident in France? Yes, if it please your majesty, my liege.

Welcome, brave captain and victorious lord! When I was young, as yet I am not old, I do remember how my father said A stouter champion never handled sword.

Strikes him Villain, thou know'st the law of arms is such That whoso draws a sword, 'tis present death, Or else this blow should broach thy dearest blood.

But I'll unto his majesty, and crave I may have liberty to venge this wrong, When thou shalt see I'll meet thee to thy cost.

Well, miscreant, I'll be there as soon as you, And, after, meet you sooner than you would.

Then judge, great lords, if I have done amiss, Or whether that such cowards ought to wear This ornament of knighthood, yea or no.

To say the truth, this fact was infamous And ill beseeming any common man, Much more a knight, a captain and a leader.

Stain to thy countrymen, thou hear'st thy doom! Be packing, therefore, thou that wast a knight: Henceforth we banish thee, on pain of death.

And now, my lord protector, view the letter Sent from our uncle Duke of Burgundy.

Is that the worst this letter doth contain? It is the worst, and all, my lord, he writes.

Why, then, Lord Talbot there shall talk with him And give him chastisement for this abuse.

How say you, my lord? are you not content? Content, my liege! yes, but that I am prevented, I should have begg'd I might have been employ'd.

Then gather strength and march unto him straight: Let him perceive how ill we brook his treason And what offence it is to flout his friends.

I go, my lord, in heart desiring still You may behold confusion of your foes.

Say, gentlemen, what makes you thus exclaim? And wherefore crave you combat? or with whom? With him, my lord, for he hath done me wrong.

What is that wrong whereof you both complain? First let me know, and then I'll answer you.

Will not this malice, Somerset, be left? Your private grudge, my Lord of York, will out, Though ne'er so cunningly you smother it.

Let this dissension first be tried by fight, And then your highness shall command a peace.

The quarrel toucheth none but us alone, Betwixt ourselves let us decide it then.

It grieves his highness: good my lords, be friends.

Come hither, you that would be combatants: Henceforth I charge you, as you love our favour, Quite to forget this quarrel and the cause.

But your discretions better can persuade Than I am able to instruct or teach: And therefore, as we hither came in peace, So let us still continue peace and love.

Exeunt all but YORK, WARWICK, EXETER and VERNON My Lord of York, I promise you, the king Prettily, methought, did play the orator.

And so he did, but yet I like it not, In that he wears the badge of Somerset.

Tush, that was but his fancy, blame him not, I dare presume, sweet prince, he thought no harm.

An if I wist he did,--but let it rest, Other affairs must now be managed.

'Tis much when sceptres are in children's hands, But more when envy breeds unkind division, There comes the rain, there begins confusion.

Go to the gates of Bourdeaux, trumpeter: Summon their general unto the wall.

Thou ominous and fearful owl of death, Our nation's terror and their bloody scourge! The period of thy tyranny approacheth.

Ten thousand French have ta'en the sacrament To rive their dangerous artillery Upon no Christian soul but English Talbot.

Drum afar off Hark! hark! the Dauphin's drum, a warning bell, Sings heavy music to thy timorous soul, And mine shall ring thy dire departure out.

He fables not, I hear the enemy: Out, some light horsemen, and peruse their wings.

O God, that Somerset, who in proud heart Doth stop my cornets, were in Talbot's place! So should we save a valiant gentleman By forfeiting a traitor and a coward.

Mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep, That thus we die, while remiss traitors sleep.

O, send some succor to the distress'd lord! He dies, we lose, I break my warlike word, We mourn, France smiles, we lose, they daily get, All 'long of this vile traitor Somerset.

Alas, what joy shall noble Talbot have To bid his young son welcome to his grave? Away! vexation almost stops my breath, That sunder'd friends greet in the hour of death.

Lucy, farewell, no more my fortune can, But curse the cause I cannot aid the man.

Maine, Blois, Poictiers, and Tours, are won away, 'Long all of Somerset and his delay.

Here is Sir William Lucy, who with me Set from our o'ermatch'd forces forth for aid.

And York as fast upon your grace exclaims, Swearing that you withhold his levied host, Collected for this expedition.

York lies, he might have sent and had the horse, I owe him little duty, and less love, And take foul scorn to fawn on him by sending.

The fraud of England, not the force of France, Hath now entrapp'd the noble-minded Talbot: Never to England shall he bear his life, But dies, betray'd to fortune by your strife.

Come, go, I will dispatch the horsemen straight: Within six hours they will be at his aid.

Too late comes rescue: he is ta'en or slain, For fly he could not, if he would have fled, And fly would Talbot never, though he might.

If he be dead, brave Talbot, then adieu! His fame lives in the world, his shame in you.

Then let me stay, and, father, do you fly: Your loss is great, so your regard should be, My worth unknown, no loss is known in me.

Upon my death the French can little boast, In yours they will, in you all hopes are lost.

Flight cannot stain the honour you have won, But mine it will, that no exploit have done: You fled for vantage, everyone will swear, But, if I bow, they'll say it was for fear.

There is no hope that ever I will stay, If the first hour I shrink and run away.

Here on my knee I beg mortality, Rather than life preserved with infamy.

Shall all thy mother's hopes lie in one tomb? Ay, rather than I'll shame my mother's womb.

Yes, your renowned name: shall flight abuse it? Thy father's charge shall clear thee from that stain.

And leave my followers here to fight and die? My age was never tainted with such shame.

Then here I take my leave of thee, fair son, Born to eclipse thy life this afternoon.

Alarum: excursions, wherein JOHN TALBOT is hemmed about, and TALBOT rescues him Saint George and victory! fight, soldiers, fight.

The regent hath with Talbot broke his word And left us to the rage of France his sword.

Where is John Talbot? Pause, and take thy breath, I gave thee life and rescued thee from death.

O, twice my father, twice am I thy son! The life thou gavest me first was lost and done, Till with thy warlike sword, despite of late, To my determined time thou gavest new date.

When from the Dauphin's crest thy sword struck fire, It warm'd thy father's heart with proud desire Of bold-faced victory.

Then leaden age, Quicken'd with youthful spleen and warlike rage, Beat down Alencon, Orleans, Burgundy, And from the pride of Gallia rescued thee.

Then follow thou thy desperate sire of Crete, Thou Icarus, thy life to me is sweet: If thou wilt fight, fight by thy father's side, And, commendable proved, let's die in pride.

O, thou, whose wounds become hard-favour'd death, Speak to thy father ere thou yield thy breath! Brave death by speaking, whether he will or no, Imagine him a Frenchman and thy foe.

Poor boy! he smiles, methinks, as who should say, Had death been French, then death had died to-day.

Come, come and lay him in his father's arms: My spirit can no longer bear these harms.

Soldiers, adieu! I have what I would have, Now my old arms are young John Talbot's grave.

Had York and Somerset brought rescue in, We should have found a bloody day of this.

O, no, forbear! for that which we have fled During the life, let us not wrong it dead.

Herald, conduct me to the Dauphin's tent, To know who hath obtained the glory of the day.

On what submissive message art thou sent? Submission, Dauphin! 'tis a mere French word, We English warriors wot not what it means.

I come to know what prisoners thou hast ta'en And to survey the bodies of the dead.

Him that thou magnifiest with all these titles Stinking and fly-blown lies here at our feet.

Give me their bodies, that I may bear them hence And give them burial as beseems their worth.

I think this upstart is old Talbot's ghost, He speaks with such a proud commanding spirit.

For God's sake let him have 'em, to keep them here, They would but stink, and putrefy the air.

I'll bear them hence, but from their ashes shall be rear'd A phoenix that shall make all France afeard.

And now to Paris, in this conquering vein: All will be ours, now bloody Talbot's slain.

How doth your grace affect their motion? Well, my good lord, and as the only means To stop effusion of our Christian blood And 'stablish quietness on every side.

Ay, marry, uncle, for I always thought It was both impious and unnatural That such immanity and bloody strife Should reign among professors of one faith.

Marriage, uncle! alas, my years are young! And fitter is my study and my books Than wanton dalliance with a paramour.

Yet call the ambassador, and, as you please, So let them have their answers every one: I shall be well content with any choice Tends to God's glory and my country's weal.

My lords ambassadors, your several suits Have been consider'd and debated on.

And therefore are we certainly resolved To draw conditions of a friendly peace, Which by my Lord of Winchester we mean Shall be transported presently to France.

In argument and proof of which contract, Bear her this jewel, pledge of my affection.

And so, my lord protector, see them guarded And safely brought to Dover, where inshipp'd Commit them to the fortune of the sea.

Stay, my lord legate: you shall first receive The sum of money which I promised Should be deliver'd to his holiness For clothing me in these grave ornaments.

These news, my lord, may cheer our drooping spirits: 'Tis said the stout Parisians do revolt And turn again unto the warlike French.

Then march to Paris, royal Charles of France, And keep not back your powers in dalliance.

Peace be amongst them, if they turn to us, Else, ruin combat with their palaces! Success unto our valiant general, And happiness to his accomplices! What tidings send our scouts? I prithee, speak.

The English army, that divided was Into two parties, is now conjoined in one, And means to give you battle presently.

Somewhat too sudden, sirs, the warning is, But we will presently provide for them.

I trust the ghost of Talbot is not there: Now he is gone, my lord, you need not fear.

Command the conquest, Charles, it shall be thine, Let Henry fret and all the world repine.

Then on, my lords, and France be fortunate! Alarum.

Excursions. Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE The regent conquers, and the Frenchmen fly.

Now help, ye charming spells and periapts, And ye choice spirits that admonish me And give me signs of future accidents.

You speedy helpers, that are substitutes Under the lordly monarch of the north, Appear and aid me in this enterprise.

This speedy and quick appearance argues proof Of your accustom'd diligence to me.

Now, ye familiar spirits, that are cull'd Out of the powerful regions under earth, Help me this once, that France may get the field.

They hang their heads No hope to have redress? My body shall Pay recompense, if you will grant my suit.

They shake their heads Cannot my body nor blood-sacrifice Entreat you to your wonted furtherance? Then take my soul, my body, soul and all, Before that England give the French the foil.

They depart See, they forsake me! Now the time is come That France must vail her lofty-plumed crest And let her head fall into England's lap.

My ancient incantations are too weak, And hell too strong for me to buckle with: Now, France, thy glory droopeth to the dust.

A goodly prize, fit for the devil's grace! See, how the ugly wench doth bend her brows, As if with Circe she would change my shape! Changed to a worser shape thou canst not be.

O, Charles the Dauphin is a proper man, No shape but his can please your dainty eye.

Enter SUFFOLK with MARGARET in his hand Be what thou wilt, thou art my prisoner.

Gazes on her O fairest beauty, do not fear nor fly! For I will touch thee but with reverent hands, I kiss these fingers for eternal peace, And lay them gently on thy tender side.

Margaret my name, and daughter to a king, The King of Naples, whosoe'er thou art.

Be not offended, nature's miracle, Thou art allotted to be ta'en by me: So doth the swan her downy cygnets save, Keeping them prisoner underneath her wings.

Fain would I woo her, yet I dare not speak: I'll call for pen and ink, and write my mind.

Say, Earl of Suffolk--if thy name be so-- What ransom must I pay before I pass? For I perceive I am thy prisoner.

Fond man, remember that thou hast a wife, Then how can Margaret be thy paramour? I were best to leave him, for he will not hear.

For whom? Why, for my king: tush, that's a wooden thing! He talks of wood: it is some carpenter.

Hear ye, captain, are you not at leisure? It shall be so, disdain they ne'er so much.

What though I be enthrall'd? he seems a knight, And will not any way dishonour me.

Perhaps I shall be rescued by the French, And then I need not crave his courtesy.

Sweet madam, give me a hearing in a cause-- Tush, women have been captivate ere now.

Lady, wherefore talk you so? I cry you mercy, 'tis but Quid for Quo.

Say, gentle princess, would you not suppose Your bondage happy, to be made a queen? To be a queen in bondage is more vile Than is a slave in base servility, For princes should be free.

And so shall you, If happy England's royal king be free.

No, gentle madam, I unworthy am To woo so fair a dame to be his wife, And have no portion in the choice myself.

How say you, madam, are ye so content? An if my father please, I am content.

And, madam, at your father's castle walls We'll crave a parley, to confer with him.

Enter REIGNIER on the walls See, Reignier, see, thy daughter prisoner! To whom? To me.

Suffolk, what remedy? I am a soldier, and unapt to weep, Or to exclaim on fortune's fickleness.

Speaks Suffolk as he thinks? Fair Margaret knows That Suffolk doth not flatter, face, or feign.

Upon thy princely warrant, I descend To give thee answer of thy just demand.

Enter REIGNIER, below Welcome, brave earl, into our territories: Command in Anjou what your honour pleases.

That is her ransom, I deliver her, And those two counties I will undertake Your grace shall well and quietly enjoy.

And I again, in Henry's royal name, As deputy unto that gracious king, Give thee her hand, for sign of plighted faith.

Reignier of France, I give thee kingly thanks, Because this is in traffic of a king.

And yet, methinks, I could be well content To be mine own attorney in this case.

I'll over then to England with this news, And make this marriage to be solemnized.

So farewell, Reignier: set this diamond safe In golden palaces, as it becomes.

I do embrace thee, as I would embrace The Christian prince, King Henry, were he here.

Farewell, my lord: good wishes, praise and prayers Shall Suffolk ever have of Margaret.

Farewell, sweet madam: but hark you, Margaret, No princely commendations to my king? Such commendations as becomes a maid, A virgin and his servant, say to him.

But madam, I must trouble you again, No loving token to his majesty? Yes, my good lord, a pure unspotted heart, Never yet taint with love, I send the king.

Kisses her That for thyself: I will not so presume To send such peevish tokens to a king.

O, wert thou for myself! But, Suffolk, stay, Thou mayst not wander in that labyrinth, There Minotaurs and ugly treasons lurk.

Out, out! My lords, an please you, 'tis not so, I did beget her, all the parish knows: Her mother liveth yet, can testify She was the first fruit of my bachelorship.

Graceless! wilt thou deny thy parentage? This argues what her kind of life hath been, Wicked and vile, and so her death concludes.

Fie, Joan, that thou wilt be so obstacle! God knows thou art a collop of my flesh, And for thy sake have I shed many a tear: Deny me not, I prithee, gentle Joan.

Peasant, avaunt! You have suborn'd this man, Of purpose to obscure my noble birth.

'Tis true, I gave a noble to the priest The morn that I was wedded to her mother.

Take her away, for she hath lived too long, To fill the world with vicious qualities.

Will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts? Then, Joan, discover thine infirmity, That warranteth by law to be thy privilege.

I am with child, ye bloody homicides: Murder not then the fruit within my womb, Although ye hale me to a violent death.

Well, go to, we'll have no bastards live, Especially since Charles must father it.

You are deceived, my child is none of his: It was Alencon that enjoy'd my love.

Alencon! that notorious Machiavel! It dies, an if it had a thousand lives.

O, give me leave, I have deluded you: 'Twas neither Charles nor yet the duke I named, But Reignier, king of Naples, that prevail'd.

Why, here's a girl! I think she knows not well, There were so many, whom she may accuse.

Strumpet, thy words condemn thy brat and thee: Use no entreaty, for it is in vain.

Be patient, York: if we conclude a peace, It shall be with such strict and severe covenants As little shall the Frenchmen gain thereby.

Since, lords of England, it is thus agreed That peaceful truce shall be proclaim'd in France, We come to be informed by yourselves What the conditions of that league must be.

Speak, Winchester, for boiling choler chokes The hollow passage of my poison'd voice, By sight of these our baleful enemies.

Must he be then as shadow of himself? Adorn his temples with a coronet, And yet, in substance and authority, Retain but privilege of a private man? This proffer is absurd and reasonless.

My lord, you do not well in obstinacy To cavil in the course of this contract: If once it be neglected, ten to one We shall not find like opportunity.

How say'st thou, Charles? shall our condition stand? It shall, Only reserved, you claim no interest In any of our towns of garrison.

Then swear allegiance to his majesty, As thou art knight, never to disobey Nor be rebellious to the crown of England, Thou, nor thy nobles, to the crown of England.

So, now dismiss your army when ye please: Hang up your ensign, let your drums be still, For here we entertain a solemn peace.

Therefore, my lord protector, give consent That Margaret may be England's royal queen.

Why, what, I pray, is Margaret more than that? Her father is no better than an earl, Although in glorious titles he excel.

Yes, lord, her father is a king, The King of Naples and Jerusalem, And of such great authority in France As his alliance will confirm our peace And keep the Frenchmen in allegiance.

And so the Earl of Armagnac may do, Because he is near kinsman unto Charles.

Beside, his wealth doth warrant a liberal dower, Where Reignier sooner will receive than give.

A dower, my lords! disgrace not so your king, That he should be so abject, base and poor, To choose for wealth and not for perfect love.

Henry is able to enrich his queen And not seek a queen to make him rich: So worthless peasants bargain for their wives, As market-men for oxen, sheep, or horse.

For what is wedlock forced but a hell, An age of discord and continual strife? Whereas the contrary bringeth bliss, And is a pattern of celestial peace.

Then yield, my lords, and here conclude with me That Margaret shall be queen, and none but she.

Be gone, I say, for, till you do return, I rest perplexed with a thousand cares.

And you, good uncle, banish all offence: If you do censure me by what you were, Not what you are, I know it will excuse This sudden execution of my will.

And so, conduct me where, from company, I may revolve and ruminate my grief.

Thus Suffolk hath prevail'd, and thus he goes, As did the youthful Paris once to Greece, With hope to find the like event in love, But prosper better than the Trojan did.

Margaret shall now be queen, and rule the king, But I will rule both her, the king and realm.

Welcome, Queen Margaret: I can express no kinder sign of love Than this kind kiss.

O Lord, that lends me life, Lend me a heart replete with thankfulness! For thou hast given me in this beauteous face A world of earthly blessings to my soul, If sympathy of love unite our thoughts.

Her sight did ravish, but her grace in speech, Her words y-clad with wisdom's majesty, Makes me from wondering fall to weeping joys, Such is the fulness of my heart's content.

My lord protector, so it please your grace, Here are the articles of contracted peace Between our sovereign and the French king Charles, For eighteen months concluded by consent.

that the duchies of Anjou and Maine shall be released and delivered over to the king her father, and she sent over of the King of England's own proper cost and charges, without having any dowry.

Lord marquess, kneel down: We here create thee the first duke of Suffolk, And gird thee with the sword.

Cousin of York, We here discharge your grace from being regent I' the parts of France, till term of eighteen months Be full expired.

Thanks, uncle Winchester, Gloucester, York, Buckingham, Somerset, Salisbury, and Warwick, We thank you all for the great favour done, In entertainment to my princely queen.

Come, let us in, and with all speed provide To see her coronation be perform'd.

Brave peers of England, pillars of the state, To you Duke Humphrey must unload his grief, Your grief, the common grief of all the land.

Now, by the death of Him that died for all, These counties were the keys of Normandy.

But wherefore weeps Warwick, my valiant son? For grief that they are past recovery: For, were there hope to conquer them again, My sword should shed hot blood, mine eyes no tears.

I never read but England's kings have had Large sums of gold and dowries with their wives: And our King Henry gives away his own, To match with her that brings no vantages.

My Lord of Winchester, I know your mind, 'Tis not my speeches that you do mislike, But 'tis my presence that doth trouble ye.

Rancour will out: proud prelate, in thy face I see thy fury: if I longer stay, We shall begin our ancient bickerings.

Lordings, farewell, and say, when I am gone, I prophesied France will be lost ere long.

'Tis known to you he is mine enemy, Nay, more, an enemy unto you all, And no great friend, I fear me, to the king.

Look to it, lords! let not his smoothing words Bewitch your hearts, be wise and circumspect.

This weighty business will not brook delay: I'll to the Duke of Suffolk presently.

Or thou or I, Somerset, will be protector, Despite Duke Humphrey or the cardinal.

While these do labour for their own preferment, Behoves it us to labour for the realm.

I never saw but Humphrey Duke of Gloucester Did bear him like a noble gentleman.

Oft have I seen the haughty cardinal, More like a soldier than a man o' the church, As stout and proud as he were lord of all, Swear like a ruffian and demean himself Unlike the ruler of a commonweal.

So God help Warwick, as he loves the land, And common profit of his country! Then let's make haste away, and look unto the main.

I cannot blame them all: what is't to them? 'Tis thine they give away, and not their own.

Methinks the realms of England, France and Ireland Bear that proportion to my flesh and blood As did the fatal brand Althaea burn'd Unto the prince's heart of Calydon.

Anjou and Maine both given unto the French! Cold news for me, for I had hope of France, Even as I have of fertile England's soil.

O Nell, sweet Nell, if thou dost love thy lord, Banish the canker of ambitious thoughts.

And may that thought, when I imagine ill Against my king and nephew, virtuous Henry, Be my last breathing in this mortal world! My troublous dream this night doth make me sad.

What dream'd my lord? tell me, and I'll requite it With sweet rehearsal of my morning's dream.

Tut, this was nothing but an argument That he that breaks a stick of Gloucester's grove Shall lose his head for his presumption.

My lord protector, 'tis his highness' pleasure You do prepare to ride unto Saint Alban's, Where as the king and queen do mean to hawk.

Come, Nell, thou wilt ride with us? Yes, my good lord, I'll follow presently.

Follow I must, I cannot go before, While Gloucester bears this base and humble mind.

Where are you there? Sir John! nay, fear not, man, We are alone, here's none but thee and I.

Jesus preserve your royal majesty! What say'st thou? majesty! I am but grace.

But, by the grace of God, and Hume's advice, Your grace's title shall be multiplied.

It is enough, I'll think upon the questions: When from St.

Alban's we do make return, We'll see these things effected to the full.

Here, Hume, take this reward, make merry, man, With thy confederates in this weighty cause.

Hume must make merry with the duchess' gold, Marry, and shall.

But how now, Sir John Hume! Seal up your lips, and give no words but mum: The business asketh silent secrecy.

Dame Eleanor gives gold to bring the witch: Gold cannot come amiss, were she a devil.

They say 'A crafty knave does need no broker,' Yet am I Suffolk and the cardinal's broker.

Hume, if you take not heed, you shall go near To call them both a pair of crafty knaves.

Well, so it stands, and thus, I fear, at last Hume's knavery will be the duchess' wreck, And her attainture will be Humphrey's fall: Sort how it will, I shall have gold for all.

My masters, let's stand close: my lord protector will come this way by and by, and then we may deliver our supplications in the quill.

Marry, the Lord protect him, for he's a good man! Jesu bless him! Here a' comes, methinks, and the queen with him.

Come back, fool, this is the Duke of Suffolk, and not my lord protector.

What's yours? What's here! 'Against the Duke of Suffolk, for enclosing the commons of Melford.

How now, sir knave! Alas, sir, I am but a poor petitioner of our whole township.

Horner, for saying that the Duke of York was rightful heir to the crown.

What sayst thou? did the Duke of York say he was rightful heir to the crown? That my master was? no, forsooth: my master said that he was, and that the king was an usurper.

Who is there? Take this fellow in, and send for his master with a pursuivant presently: we'll hear more of your matter before the King.

And as for you, that love to be protected Under the wings of our protector's grace, Begin your suits anew, and sue to him.

Tears the supplication Away, base cullions! Suffolk, let them go.

I would the college of the cardinals Would choose him pope, and carry him to Rome, And set the triple crown upon his head: That were a state fit for his holiness.

Madam, be patient: as I was cause Your highness came to England, so will I In England work your grace's full content.

Beside the haughty protector, have we Beaufort, The imperious churchman, Somerset, Buckingham, And grumbling York: and not the least of these But can do more in England than the king.

And he of these that can do most of all Cannot do more in England than the Nevils: Salisbury and Warwick are no simple peers.

Not all these lords do vex me half so much As that proud dame, the lord protector's wife.

Madam, myself have limed a bush for her, And placed a quire of such enticing birds, That she will light to listen to the lays, And never mount to trouble you again.

So, let her rest: and, madam, list to me, For I am bold to counsel you in this.

Although we fancy not the cardinal, Yet must we join with him and with the lords, Till we have brought Duke Humphrey in disgrace.

As for the Duke of York, this late complaint Will make but little for his benefit.

So, one by one, we'll weed them all at last, And you yourself shall steer the happy helm.

Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER,  CARDINAL, BUCKINGHAM, YORK, SOMERSET, SALISBURY, WARWICK, and the DUCHESS For my part, noble lords, I care not which, Or Somerset or York, all's one to me.

If York have ill demean'd himself in France, Then let him be denay'd the regentship.

If Somerset be unworthy of the place, Let York be regent, I will yield to him.

Whether your grace be worthy, yea or no, Dispute not that: York is the worthier.

Peace, son! and show some reason, Buckingham, Why Somerset should be preferred in this.

Madam, the king is old enough himself To give his censure: these are no women's matters.

If he be old enough, what needs your grace To be protector of his excellence? Madam, I am protector of the realm, And, at his pleasure, will resign my place.

The commons hast thou rack'd, the clergy's bags Are lank and lean with thy extortions.

Thy sumptuous buildings and thy wife's attire Have cost a mass of public treasury.

Thy cruelty in execution Upon offenders, hath exceeded law, And left thee to the mercy of the law.

They sale of offices and towns in France, If they were known, as the suspect is great, Would make thee quickly hop without thy head.

Against her will! good king, look to't in time, She'll hamper thee, and dandle thee like a baby: Though in this place most master wear no breeches, She shall not strike Dame Eleanor unrevenged.

Lord cardinal, I will follow Eleanor, And listen after Humphrey, how he proceeds: She's tickled now, her fume needs no spurs, She'll gallop far enough to her destruction.

Re-enter GLOUCESTER Now, lords, my choler being over-blown With walking once about the quadrangle, I come to talk of commonwealth affairs.

Before we make election, give me leave To show some reason, of no little force, That York is most unmeet of any man.

That can I witness, and a fouler fact Did never traitor in the land commit.

Say, man, were these thy words? An't shall please your majesty, I never said nor thought any such matter: God is my witness, I am falsely accused by the villain.

By these ten bones, my lords, he did speak them to me in the garret one night, as we were scouring my Lord of York's armour.

Base dunghill villain and mechanical, I'll have thy head for this thy traitor's speech.

I do beseech your royal majesty, Let him have all the rigor of the law.

Alas, my lord, hang me, if ever I spake the words.

Alas, my lord, I cannot fight, for God's sake, pity my case.

The spite of man prevaileth against me. O Lord, have mercy upon me! I shall never be able to fight a blow.

O Lord, my heart! Sirrah, or you must fight, or else be hang'd.

Away with them to prison, and the day of combat shall be the last of the next month.

Exeunt Come, my masters, the duchess, I tell you, expects performance of your promises.

Master Hume, we are therefore provided: will her ladyship behold and hear our exorcisms? Ay, what else? fear you not her courage.

Mother Jourdain, be you prostrate and grovel on the earth, John Southwell, read you, and let us to our work.

Madam, sit you and fear not: whom we raise, We will make fast within a hallow'd verge.

Here they do the ceremonies belonging, and make the  circle, BOLINGBROKE or SOUTHWELL reads, Conjuro te, and c.

It thunders and lightens terribly, then the Spirit riseth By the eternal God, whose name and power Thou tremblest at, answer that I shall ask, For, till thou speak, thou shalt not pass from hence.

That I had said and done! 'First of the king: what shall of him become?' Reading out of a paper The duke yet lives that Henry shall depose, But him outlive, and die a violent death.

As the Spirit speaks, SOUTHWELL writes the answer 'What fates await the Duke of Suffolk?' By water shall he die, and take his end.

'What shall befall the Duke of Somerset?' Let him shun castles, Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains Than where castles mounted stand.

Descend to darkness and the burning lake! False fiend, avoid! Thunder and lightning.

Exit Spirit Lay hands upon these traitors and their trash.

What, madam, are you there? the king and commonweal Are deeply indebted for this piece of pains: My lord protector will, I doubt it not, See you well guerdon'd for these good deserts.

Not half so bad as thine to England's king, Injurious duke, that threatest where's no cause.

True, madam, none at all: what call you this? Away with them! let them be clapp'd up close.

You, madam, shall with us. Stafford, take her to thee.

All, away! Lord Buckingham, methinks, you watch'd her well: A pretty plot, well chosen to build upon! Now, pray, my lord, let's see the devil's writ.

What have we here? 'The duke yet lives, that Henry shall depose, But him outlive, and die a violent death.

Why, this is just 'Aio te, AEacida, Romanos vincere posse.

Well, to the rest: 'Tell me what fate awaits the Duke of Suffolk? By water shall he die, and take his end.

What shall betide the Duke of Somerset? Let him shun castles, Safer shall he be upon the sandy plains Than where castles mounted stand.

Come, come, my lords, These oracles are hardly attain'd, And hardly understood.

The king is now in progress towards Saint Alban's, With him the husband of this lovely lady: Thither go these news, as fast as horse can carry them: A sorry breakfast for my lord protector.

Your grace shall give me leave, my Lord of York, To be the post, in hope of his reward.

Who's within there, ho! Invite my Lords of Salisbury and Warwick To sup with me to-morrow night.

Away! Believe me, lords, for flying at the brook, I saw not better sport these seven years' day: Yet, by your leave, the wind was very high, And, ten to one, old Joan had not gone out.

But what a point, my lord, your falcon made, And what a pitch she flew above the rest! To see how God in all his creatures works! Yea, man and birds are fain of climbing high.

No marvel, an it like your majesty, My lord protector's hawks do tower so well, They know their master loves to be aloft, And bears his thoughts above his falcon's pitch.

My lord, 'tis but a base ignoble mind That mounts no higher than a bird can soar.

Ay, my lord cardinal? how think you by that? Were it not good your grace could fly to heaven? The treasury of everlasting joy.

As who, my lord? Why, as you, my lord, An't like your lordly lord-protectorship.

I prithee, peace, good queen, And whet not on these furious peers, For blessed are the peacemakers on earth.

Let me be blessed for the peace I make, Against this proud protector, with my sword! 'twere come to that! numbers for the matter, In thine own person answer thy abuse.

not peep: an if thou darest, This evening, on the east side of the grove.

How now, my lords! Believe me, cousin Gloucester, Had not your man put up the fowl so suddenly, We had had more sport.

east side of the grove? Why, how now, uncle Gloucester! Talking of hawking, nothing else, my lord.

Aside to CARDINAL Now, by God's mother, priest, I'll shave your crown for this, Or all my fence shall fail.

How irksome is this music to my heart! When such strings jar, what hope of harmony? I pray, my lords, let me compound this strife.

What means this noise? Fellow, what miracle dost thou proclaim? A miracle! a miracle! Come to the king and tell him what miracle.

Forsooth, a blind man at Saint Alban's shrine, Within this half-hour, hath received his sight, A man that ne'er saw in his life before.

Now, God be praised, that to believing souls Gives light in darkness, comfort in despair! Here comes the townsmen on procession, To present your highness with the man.

Great is his comfort in this earthly vale, Although by his sight his sin be multiplied.

Stand by, my masters: bring him near the king, His highness' pleasure is to talk with him.

Good fellow, tell us here the circumstance, That we for thee may glorify the Lord.

What, hast thou been long blind and now restored? Born blind, an't please your grace.

What woman is this? His wife, an't like your worship.

Hadst thou been his mother, thou couldst have better told.

Where wert thou born? At Berwick in the north, an't like your grace.

Poor soul, God's goodness hath been great to thee: Let never day nor night unhallow'd pass, But still remember what the Lord hath done.

Most true, forsooth, and many time and oft Myself have heard a voice to call him so.

What, art thou lame? Ay, God Almighty help me! How camest thou so? A fall off of a tree.

What, and wouldst climb a tree? But that in all my life, when I was a youth.

Mass, thou lovedst plums well, that wouldst venture so.

Alas,  good master, my wife desired some damsons, And made me climb, with danger of my life.

Let me see thine eyes: wink now: now open them: In my opinion yet thou seest not well.

Yes, master, clear as day, I thank God and Saint Alban.

Say'st thou me so? What colour is this cloak of? Red, master, red as blood.

What colour is my gown of? Black, forsooth: coal-black as jet.

Why, then, thou know'st what colour jet is of? And yet, I think, jet did he never see.

Tell me, sirrah, what's my name? Alas, master, I know not.

What's thine own name? Saunder Simpcox, an if it please you, master.

Then, Saunder, sit there, the lyingest knave in Christendom.

If thou hadst been born blind, thou mightest as well have known all our names as thus to name the several colours we do wear.

Sight may distinguish of colours, but suddenly to nominate them all, it is impossible.

Now, sirrah, if you mean to save yourself from whipping, leap me over this stool and run away.

Alas, master, I am not able to stand alone: You go about to torture me in vain.

Sirrah beadle, whip him till he leap over that same stool.

Alas, master, what shall I do? I am not able to stand.

After the Beadle hath hit him once, he leaps over the stool and runs away, and they follow and cry, 'A miracle!' O God, seest Thou this, and bearest so long? It made me laugh to see the villain run.

Let them be whipped through every market-town, till they come to Berwick, from whence they came.

But you have done more miracles than I, You made in a day, my lord, whole towns to fly.

What tidings with our cousin Buckingham? Such as my heart doth tremble to unfold.

by this means Your lady is forthcoming yet at London.

This news, I think, hath turn'd your weapon's edge, 'Tis like, my lord, you will not keep your hour.

Ambitious churchman, leave to afflict my heart: Sorrow and grief have vanquish'd all my powers, And, vanquish'd as I am, I yield to thee, Or to the meanest groom.

O God, what mischiefs work the wicked ones, Heaping confusion on their own heads thereby! Gloucester, see here the tainture of thy nest.

Sweet York, begin: and if thy claim be good, The Nevils are thy subjects to command.

Father, the duke hath told the truth: Thus got the house of Lancaster the crown.

Which now they hold by force and not by right, For Richard, the first son's heir, being dead, The issue of the next son should have reign'd.

This Edmund, in the reign of Bolingbroke, As I have read, laid claim unto the crown, And, but for Owen Glendower, had been king, Who kept him in captivity till he died.

His eldest sister, Anne, My mother, being heir unto the crown Married Richard Earl of Cambridge, who was son To Edmund Langley, Edward the Third's fifth son.

What plain proceeding is more plain than this? Henry doth claim the crown from John of Gaunt, The fourth son, York claims it from the third.

Till Lionel's issue fails, his should not reign: It fails not yet, but flourishes in thee And in thy sons, fair slips of such a stock.

Then, father Salisbury, kneel we together, And in this private plot be we the first That shall salute our rightful sovereign With honour of his birthright to the crown.

Long live our sovereign Richard, England's king! We thank you, lords.

But I am not your king Till I be crown'd and that my sword be stain'd With heart-blood of the house of Lancaster, And that's not suddenly to be perform'd, But with advice and silent secrecy.

My heart assures me that the Earl of Warwick Shall one day make the Duke of York a king.

And, Nevil, this I do assure myself: Richard shall live to make the Earl of Warwick The greatest man in England but the king.

You four, from hence to prison back again, From thence unto the place of execution: The witch in Smithfield shall be burn'd to ashes, And you three shall be strangled on the gallows.

Eleanor, the law, thou see'st, hath judged thee: I cannot justify whom the law condemns.

Ah, Humphrey, this dishonour in thine age Will bring thy head with sorrow to the ground! I beseech your majesty, give me leave to go, Sorrow would solace and mine age would ease.

I see no reason why a king of years Should be to be protected like a child.

My staff? here, noble Henry, is my staff: As willingly do I the same resign As e'er thy father Henry made it mine, And even as willingly at thy feet I leave it As others would ambitiously receive it.

This staff of honour raught, there let it stand Where it best fits to be, in Henry's hand.

Thus droops this lofty pine and hangs his sprays, Thus Eleanor's pride dies in her youngest days.

Please it your majesty, This is the day appointed for the combat, And ready are the appellant and defendant, The armourer and his man, to enter the lists, So please your highness to behold the fight.

Ay, good my lord, for purposely therefore Left I the court, to see this quarrel tried.

Here, neighbour Horner, I drink to you in a cup of sack: and fear not, neighbour, you shall do well enough.

And here's a pot of good double beer, neighbour: drink, and fear not your man.

Let it come, i' faith, and I'll pledge you all, and a fig for Peter! First 'Prentice	Here, Peter, I drink to thee: and be not afraid.

Second 'Prentice	Be merry, Peter, and fear not thy master: fight for credit of the 'prentices.

I thank you all: drink, and pray for me, I pray you, for I think I have taken my last draught in this world.

Here, Robin, an if I die, I give thee my apron: and, Will, thou shalt have my hammer: and here, Tom, take all the money that I have.

O Lord bless me! I pray God! for I am never able to deal with my master, he hath learnt me so much fence already.

Peter! what more? Thump! then see thou thump thy master well.

Sound, trumpets, alarum to the combatants! Alarum.

They fight, and PETER strikes him down Hold, Peter, hold! I confess, I confess treason.

Fellow, thank God, and the good wine in thy master's way.

Exeunt Thus sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud, And after summer evermore succeeds Barren winter, with his wrathful nipping cold: So cares and joys abound, as seasons fleet.

Ten is the hour that was appointed me To watch the coming of my punish'd duchess: Uneath may she endure the flinty streets, To tread them with her tender-feeling feet.

But, soft! I think she comes, and I'll prepare My tear-stain'd eyes to see her miseries.

So please your grace, we'll take her from the sheriff.

Come you, my lord, to see my open shame? Now thou dost penance too.

The ruthless flint doth cut my tender feet, And when I start, the envious people laugh And bid me be advised how I tread.

Wouldst have me rescue thee from this reproach? Why, yet thy scandal were not wiped away But I in danger for the breach of law.

Thy greatest help is quiet, gentle Nell: I pray thee, sort thy heart to patience, These few days' wonder will be quickly worn.

I summon your grace to his majesty's parliament, Holden at Bury the first of this next month.

And my consent ne'er ask'd herein before! This is close dealing.

Well, I will be there. My Nell, I take my leave: and, master sheriff, Let not her penance exceed the king's commission.

An't please your grace, here my commission stays, And Sir John Stanley is appointed now To take her with him to the Isle of Man.

Must you, Sir John, protect my lady here? So am I given in charge, may't please your grace.

Art thou gone too? all comfort go with thee! For none abides with me: my joy is death, Death, at whose name I oft have been afear'd, Because I wish'd this world's eternity.

Stanley, I prithee, go, and take me hence, I care not whither, for I beg no favour, Only convey me where thou art commanded.

Why, madam, that is to the Isle of Man, There to be used according to your state.

That's bad enough, for I am but reproach: And shall I then be used reproachfully? Like to a duchess, and Duke Humphrey's lady, According to that state you shall be used.

Sheriff, farewell, and better than I fare, Although thou hast been conduct of my shame.

Come, Stanley, shall we go? Madam, your penance done, throw off this sheet, And go we to attire you for our journey.

My shame will not be shifted with my sheet: No, it will hang upon my richest robes And show itself, attire me how I can.

Small curs are not regarded when they grin, But great men tremble when the lion roars, And Humphrey is no little man in England.

First note that he is near you in descent, And should you fall, he as the next will mount.

By flattery hath he won the commons' hearts, And when he please to make commotion, 'Tis to be fear'd they all will follow him.

Now 'tis the spring, and weeds are shallow-rooted, Suffer them now, and they'll o'ergrow the garden And choke the herbs for want of husbandry.

The reverent care I bear unto my lord Made me collect these dangers in the duke.

If it be fond, call it a woman's fear, Which fear if better reasons can supplant, I will subscribe and say I wrong'd the duke.

My Lord of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York, Reprove my allegation, if you can, Or else conclude my words effectual.

Well hath your highness seen into this duke, And, had I first been put to speak my mind, I think I should have told your grace's tale.

Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep, And in his simple show he harbours treason.

No, no, my sovereign, Gloucester is a man Unsounded yet and full of deep deceit.

Which time will bring to light in smooth Duke Humphrey.

Who cannot steal a shape that means deceit? Take heed, my lord, the welfare of us all Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man.

All health unto my gracious sovereign! Welcome, Lord Somerset.

What news from France? That all your interest in those territories Is utterly bereft you, all is lost.

Cold news, Lord Somerset: but God's will be done! As firmly as I hope for fertile England.

Thus are my blossoms blasted in the bud And caterpillars eat my leaves away, But I will remedy this gear ere long, Or sell my title for a glorious grave.

All happiness unto my lord the king! Pardon, my liege, that I have stay'd so long.

Nay, Gloucester, know that thou art come too soon, Unless thou wert more loyal than thou art: I do arrest thee of high treason here.

Well, Suffolk, thou shalt not see me blush Nor change my countenance for this arrest: A heart unspotted is not easily daunted.

Is it but thought so? what are they that think it? I never robb'd the soldiers of their pay, Nor ever had one penny bribe from France.

I say no more than truth, so help me God! In your protectorship you did devise Strange tortures for offenders never heard of, That England was defamed by tyranny.

Why, 'tis well known that, whiles I was Pity was all the fault that was in me, For I should melt at an offender's tears, And lowly words were ransom for their fault.

My lord, these faults are easy, quickly answered: But mightier crimes are laid unto your charge, Whereof you cannot easily purge yourself.

I do arrest you in his highness' name, And here commit you to my lord cardinal To keep, until your further time of trial.

My lord of Gloucester, 'tis my special hope That you will clear yourself from all suspect: My conscience tells me you are innocent.

Ah, gracious lord, these days are dangerous: Virtue is choked with foul ambition And charity chased hence by rancour's hand, Foul subornation is predominant And equity exiled your highness' land.

I shall not want false witness to condemn me, Nor store of treasons to augment my guilt, The ancient proverb will be well effected: 'A staff is quickly found to beat a dog.

Far truer spoke than meant: I lose, indeed, Beshrew the winners, for they play'd me false! And well such losers may have leave to speak.

He'll wrest the sense and hold us here all day: Lord cardinal, he is your prisoner.

Ah! thus King Henry throws away his crutch Before his legs be firm to bear his body.

Thus is the shepherd beaten from thy side, And wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first.

Ah, that my fear were false! ah, that it were! For, good King Henry, thy decay I fear.

My lords, what to your wisdoms seemeth best, Do or undo, as if ourself were here.

His fortunes I will weep, and, 'twixt each groan Say 'Who's a traitor? Gloucester he is none.

Free lords, cold snow melts with the sun's hot beams.

Believe me, lords, were none more wise than I-- And yet herein I judge mine own wit good-- This Gloucester should be quickly rid the world, To rid us of the fear we have of him.

That he should die is worthy policy, But yet we want a colour for his death: 'Tis meet he be condemn'd by course of law.

Ah, York, no man alive so fain as I! 'Tis York that hath more reason for his death.

No, let him die, in that he is a fox, By nature proved an enemy to the flock, Before his chaps be stain'd with crimson blood, As Humphrey, proved by reasons, to my liege.

And I    and now we three have spoke it, It skills not greatly who impugns our doom.

If York, with all his far-fet policy, Had been the regent there instead of me, He never would have stay'd in France so long.

No, not to lose it all, as thou hast done: I rather would have lost my life betimes Than bring a burthen of dishonour home By staying there so long till all were lost.

Show me one scar character'd on thy skin: Men's flesh preserved so whole do seldom win.

What, worse than nought? nay, then, a shame take all! And, in the number, thee that wishest shame! My Lord of York, try what your fortune is.

Why, our authority is his consent, And what we do establish he confirms: Then, noble York, take thou this task in hand.

I am content: provide me soldiers, lords, Whiles I take order for mine own affairs.

No more of him, for I will deal with him That henceforth he shall trouble us no more.

And so break off, the day is almost spent: Lord Suffolk, you and I must talk of that event.

My Lord of Suffolk, within fourteen days At Bristol I expect my soldiers, For there I'll ship them all for Ireland.

Faster than spring-time showers comes thought on thought, And not a thought but thinks on dignity.

My brain more busy than the labouring spider Weaves tedious snares to trap mine enemies.

Well, nobles, well, 'tis politicly done, To send me packing with an host of men: I fear me you but warm the starved snake, Who, cherish'd in your breasts, will sting your hearts.

'Twas men I lack'd and you will give them me: I take it kindly, and yet be well assured You put sharp weapons in a madman's hands.

And, for a minister of my intent, I have seduced a headstrong Kentishman, John Cade of Ashford, To make commotion, as full well he can, Under the title of John Mortimer.

Full often, like a shag-hair'd crafty kern, Hath he conversed with the enemy, And undiscover'd come to me again And given me notice of their villanies.

Say he be taken, rack'd and tortured, I know no pain they can inflict upon him Will make him say I moved him to those arms.

Run to my Lord of Suffolk, let him know We have dispatch'd the duke, as he commanded.

O that it were to do! What have we done? Didst ever hear a man so penitent? Here comes my lord.

Now, sirs, have you dispatch'd this thing? Ay, my good lord, he's dead.

Go, get you to my house, I will reward you for this venturous deed.

Have you laid fair the bed? Is all things well, According as I gave directions? 'Tis, my good lord.

Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, CARDINAL, SOMERSET, with Attendants Go, call our uncle to our presence straight, Say we intend to try his grace to-day.

Lords, take your places, and, I pray you all, Proceed no straiter 'gainst our uncle Gloucester Than from true evidence of good esteem He be approved in practise culpable.

God forbid any malice should prevail, That faultless may condemn a nobleman! Pray God he may acquit him of suspicion! I thank thee, Meg, these words content me much.

Re-enter SUFFOLK How now! why look'st thou pale? why tremblest thou? Where is our uncle? what's the matter, Suffolk? Dead in his bed, my lord, Gloucester is dead.

Marry, God forfend! God's secret judgment: I did dream to-night The duke was dumb and could not speak a word.

KING HENRY VI swoons How fares my lord? Help, lords! the king is dead.

Run, go, help, help! O Henry, ope thine eyes! He doth revive again: madam, be patient.

Thou baleful messenger, out of my sight! Upon thy eye-balls murderous tyranny Sits in grim majesty, to fright the world.

This get I by his death: ay me, unhappy! To be a queen, and crown'd with infamy! Ah, woe is me for Gloucester, wretched man! Be woe for me, more wretched than he is.

What, dost thou turn away and hide thy face? I am no loathsome leper, look on me.

What! art thou, like the adder, waxen deaf? Be poisonous too and kill thy forlorn queen.

Is all thy comfort shut in Gloucester's tomb? Why, then, dame Margaret was ne'er thy joy.

Erect his statue and worship it, And make my image but an alehouse sign.

Enter WARWICK, SALISBURY, and many Commons It is reported, mighty sovereign, That good Duke Humphrey traitorously is murder'd By Suffolk and the Cardinal Beaufort's means.

The commons, like an angry hive of bees That want their leader, scatter up and down And care not who they sting in his revenge.

Myself have calm'd their spleenful mutiny, Until they hear the order of his death.

That he is dead, good Warwick, 'tis too true, But how he died God knows, not Henry: And comment then upon his sudden death.

Stay, Salisbury, With the rude multitude till I return.

That is to see how deep my grave is made, For with his soul fled all my worldly solace, For seeing him I see my life in death.

A dreadful oath, sworn with a solemn tongue! What instance gives Lord Warwick for his vow? See how the blood is settled in his face.

It cannot be but he was murder'd here, The least of all these signs were probable.

Why, Warwick, who should do the duke to death? Myself and Beaufort had him in protection, And we, I hope, sir, are no murderers.

But both of you were vow'd Duke Humphrey's foes, And you, forsooth, had the good duke to keep: 'Tis like you would not feast him like a friend, And 'tis well seen he found an enemy.

Then you, belike, suspect these noblemen As guilty of Duke Humphrey's timeless death.

Say, if thou darest, proud Lord of Warwick-shire, That I am faulty in Duke Humphrey's death.

What dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him? He dares not calm his contumelious spirit Nor cease to be an arrogant controller, Though Suffolk dare him twenty thousand times.

Madam, be still, with reverence may I say, For every word you speak in his behalf Is slander to your royal dignity.

Away even now, or I will drag thee hence: Unworthy though thou art, I'll cope with thee And do some service to Duke Humphrey's ghost.

What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted! Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just, And he but naked, though lock'd up in steel Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted.

O Henry, let me plead for gentle Suffolk! Ungentle queen, to call him gentle Suffolk! No more, I say: if thou dost plead for him, Thou wilt but add increase unto my wrath.

Had I but said, I would have kept my word, But when I swear, it is irrevocable.

If, after three days' space, thou here be'st found On any ground that I am ruler of, The world shall not be ransom for thy life.

Come, Warwick, come, good Warwick, go with me, I have great matters to impart to thee.

Give me thy hand, That I may dew it with my mournful tears, Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place, To wash away my woful monuments.

I will repeal thee, or, be well assured, Adventure to be banished myself: And banished I am, if but from thee.

O, go not yet! Even thus two friends condemn'd Embrace and kiss and take ten thousand leaves, Loather a hundred times to part than die.

Yet now farewell, and farewell life with thee! Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished, Once by the king, and three times thrice by thee.

I can no more: live thou to joy thy life, Myself no joy in nought but that thou livest.

To France, sweet Suffolk: let me hear from thee, For wheresoe'er thou art in this world's globe, I'll have an Iris that shall find thee out.

A jewel, lock'd into the wofull'st cask That ever did contain a thing of worth.

Even as a splitted bark, so sunder we This way fall I to death.

How fares my lord? speak, Beaufort, to thy sovereign.

If thou be'st death, I'll give thee England's treasure, Enough to purchase such another island, So thou wilt let me live, and feel no pain.

Ah, what a sign it is of evil life, Where death's approach is seen so terrible! Beaufort, it is thy sovereign speaks to thee.

Died he not in his bed? where should he die? Can I make men live, whether they will or no? O, torture me no more! I will confess.

Alive again? then show me where he is: I'll give a thousand pound to look upon him.

Comb down his hair, look, look! it stands upright, Like lime-twigs set to catch my winged soul.

Give me some drink, and bid the apothecary Bring the strong poison that I bought of him.

Look with a gentle eye upon this wretch! O, beat away the busy meddling fiend That lays strong siege unto this wretch's soul.

And from his bosom purge this black despair! See, how the pangs of death do make him grin! Disturb him not, let him pass peaceably.

Peace to his soul, if God's good pleasure be! Lord cardinal, if thou think'st on heaven's bliss, Hold up thy hand, make signal of thy hope.

O God, forgive him! So bad a death argues a monstrous life.

Close up his eyes and draw the curtain close, And let us all to meditation.

Therefore bring forth the soldiers of our prize, For, whilst our pinnace anchors in the Downs, Here shall they make their ransom on the sand, Or with their blood stain this discolour'd shore.

Master, this prisoner freely give I thee, And thou that art his mate, make boot of this, The other, Walter Whitmore, is thy share.

Master's-Mate	And so much shall you give, or off goes yours.

I lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard, And therefore to revenge it, shalt thou die, To SUFFOLK And so should these, if I might have my will.

Look on my George, I am a gentleman: Rate me at what thou wilt, thou shalt be paid.

How now! why start'st thou? what, doth death affright? Thy name affrights me, in whose sound is death.

A cunning man did calculate my birth And told me that by water I should die: Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded, Thy name is Gaultier, being rightly sounded.

The Duke of Suffolk muffled up in rags! Ay, but these rags are no part of the duke: Jove sometimes went disguised, and why not I? But Jove was never slain, as thou shalt be.

Obscure and lowly swain, King Henry's blood, The honourable blood of Lancaster, Must not be shed by such a jaded groom.

Speak, captain, shall I stab the forlorn swain? First let my words stab him, as he hath me.

Convey him hence and on our longboat's side Strike off his head.

Pool! Sir Pool! lord! Ay, kennel, puddle, sink, whose filth and dirt Troubles the silver spring where England drinks.

By devilish policy art thou grown great, And, like ambitious Sylla, overgorged With gobbets of thy mother's bleeding heart.

The commons here in Kent are up in arms: And, to conclude, reproach and beggary Is crept into the palace of our king.

Drones suck not eagles' blood but rob beehives: It is impossible that I should die By such a lowly vassal as thyself.

Thy words move rage and not remorse in me: I go of message from the queen to France, I charge thee waft me safely cross the Channel.

Thou shalt have cause to fear before I leave thee.

What, are ye daunted now? now will ye stoop? My gracious lord, entreat him, speak him fair.

Suffolk's imperial tongue is stern and rough, Used to command, untaught to plead for favour.

True nobility is exempt from fear: More can I bear than you dare execute.

And as for these whose ransom we have set, It is our pleasure one of them depart, Therefore come you with us and let him go.

Re-enter WHITMORE with SUFFOLK's body There let his head and lifeless body lie, Until the queen his mistress bury it.

O barbarous and bloody spectacle! His body will I bear unto the king: If he revenge it not, yet will his friends, So will the queen, that living held him dear.

Come, and get thee a sword, though made of a lath, they have been up these two days.

I tell thee, Jack Cade the clothier means to dress the commonwealth, and turn it, and set a new nap upon it.

Well, I say it was never merry world in England since gentlemen came up.

O miserable age! virtue is not regarded in handicrafts-men.

Nay, more, the king's council are no good workmen.

I see them! I see them! there's Best's son, the tanner of Wingham,-- He shall have the skin of our enemies, to make dog's-leather of.

And Dick the Butcher,-- Then is sin struck down like an ox, and iniquity's throat cut like a calf.

And Smith the weaver,-- Argo, their thread of life is spun.

My father was a Mortimer,-- My mother a Plantagenet,-- My wife descended of the Lacies,-- sold many laces.

and there was he borne, under a hedge, for his father had never a house but the cage.

fire, being burnt i' the hand for stealing of sheep.

Be brave, then, for your captain is brave, and vows reformation.

The first thing we do, let's kill all the lawyers.

How now! who's there? The clerk of Chatham: he can write and read and cast accompt.

Here's a villain! Has a book in his pocket with red letters in't.

Nay, he can make obligations, and write court-hand.

I am sorry for't: the man is a proper man, of mine honour, unless I find him guilty, he shall not die.

Come hither, sirrah, I must examine thee: what is thy name? They use to write it on the top of letters: 'twill go hard with you.

Dost thou use to write thy name? or hast thou a mark to thyself, like an honest plain-dealing man? Sir, I thank God, I have been so well brought up that I can write my name.

He hath confessed: away with him! he's a villain and a traitor.

Away with him, I say! hang him with his pen and ink-horn about his neck.

Where's our general? Here I am, thou particular fellow.

Fly, fly, fly! Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother are hard by, with the king's forces.

He shall be encountered with a man as good as himself: he is but a knight, is a'? To equal him, I will make myself a knight presently.

Now have at him! Rebellious hinds, the filth and scum of Kent, Mark'd for the gallows, lay your weapons down, Home to your cottages, forsake this groom: The king is merciful, if you revolt.

But angry, wrathful, and inclined to blood, If you go forward, therefore yield, or die.

As for these silken-coated slaves, I pass not: It is to you, good people, that I speak, Over whom, in time to come, I hope to reign, For I am rightful heir unto the crown.

Villain, thy father was a plasterer, And thou thyself a shearman, art thou not? And Adam was a gardener.

And what of that? Marry, this: Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March.

Married the Duke of Clarence' daughter, did he not? Ay, sir.

Sir, he made a chimney in my father's house, and the bricks are alive at this day to testify it, therefore deny it not.

And will you credit this base drudge's words, That speaks he knows not what? Ay, marry, will we, therefore get ye gone.

And furthermore, well have the Lord Say's head for selling the dukedom of Maine.

And good reason, for thereby is England mained, and fain to go with a staff, but that my puissance holds it up.

Fellow kings, I tell you that that Lord Say hath gelded the commonwealth, and made it an eunuch: and more than that, he can speak French, and therefore he is a traitor.

Well, seeing gentle words will not prevail, Assail them with the army of the king.

We will not leave one lord, one gentleman: Spare none but such as go in clouted shoon, For they are thrifty honest men, and such As would, but that they dare not, take our parts.

But then are we in order when we are most out of order.

Come, march forward. Alarums to the fight, wherein SIR HUMPHREY and WILLIAM STAFFORD are slain.

Enter CADE and the rest Where's Dick, the butcher of Ashford? Here, sir.

If we mean to thrive and do good, break open the gaols and let out the prisoners.

Oft have I heard that grief softens the mind, And makes it fearful and degenerate, Think therefore on revenge and cease to weep.

How now, madam! Still lamenting and mourning for Suffolk's death? I fear me, love, if that I had been dead, Thou wouldst not have mourn'd so much for me.

No, my love, I should not mourn, but die for thee.

My gracious lord, return to Killingworth, Until a power be raised to put them down.

Ah, were the Duke of Suffolk now alive, These Kentish rebels would be soon appeased! Lord Say, the traitors hate thee, Therefore away with us to Killingworth.

The sight of me is odious in their eyes, And therefore in this city will I stay And live alone as secret as I may.

The trust I have is in mine innocence, And therefore am I bold and resolute.

Such aid as I can spare you shall command, But I am troubled here with them myself, The rebels have assay'd to win the Tower.

But get you to Smithfield, and gather head, And thither I will send you Matthew Goffe, Fight for your king, your country and your lives, And so, farewell, for I must hence again.

And here, sitting upon London-stone, I charge and command that, of the city's cost, the pissing-conduit run nothing but claret wine this first year of our reign.

And now henceforward it shall be treason for any that calls me other than Lord Mortimer.

They kill him If this fellow be wise, he'll never call ye Jack Cade more: I think he hath a very fair warning.

My lord, there's an army gathered together in Come, then, let's go fight with them, but first, go and set London bridge on fire, and, if you can, burn down the Tower too.

MATTHEW GOFFE is slain, and all the rest. Then enter CADE, with his company. So, sirs: now go some and pull down the Savoy, others to the inns of court, down with them all.

Be it a lordship, thou shalt have it for that word.

Only that the laws of England may come out of your mouth.

thrust in the mouth with a spear, and 'tis not whole breath stinks with eating toasted cheese.

Away, burn all the records of the realm: my mouth shall be the parliament of England.

My lord, a prize, a prize! here's the Lord Say, which sold the towns in France, he that made us pay one and twenty fifteens, and one shilling to the pound, the last subsidy.

Ah, thou say, thou serge, nay, thou buckram lord! now art thou within point-blank of our jurisdiction regal.

It will be proved to thy face that thou hast men about thee that usually talk of a noun and a verb, and such abominable words as no Christian ear can endure to hear.

Thou hast appointed justices of peace, to call poor men before them about matters they were not able to answer.

Moreover, thou hast put them in prison, and because they could not read, thou hast hanged them, when, indeed, only for that cause they have been most worthy to live.

Thou dost ride in a foot-cloth, dost thou not? What of that? Marry, thou oughtest not to let thy horse wear a cloak, when honester men than thou go in their hose and doublets.

And work in their shirt too, as myself, for example, that am a butcher.

You men of Kent,-- What say you of Kent? Nothing but this, 'tis 'bona terra, mala gens.

I sold not Maine, I lost not Normandy, Yet, to recover them, would lose my life.

Justice with favour have I always done, Prayers and tears have moved me, gifts could never.

O monstrous coward! what, to come behind folks? These cheeks are pale for watching for your good.

Give him a box o' the ear and that will make 'em red again.

Long sitting to determine poor men's causes Hath made me full of sickness and diseases.

Ye shall have a hempen caudle, then, and the help of hatchet.

Why dost thou quiver, man? The palsy, and not fear, provokes me.

Nay, he nods at us, as who should say, I'll be even with you: I'll see if his head will stand steadier on a pole, or no.

Take him away, and behead him. Tell me wherein have I offended most? Have I affected wealth or honour? speak.

O, let me live! but I'll bridle it: he shall die, an it be but for pleading so well for his life.

Away with him! he has a familiar under his tongue, he speaks not o' God's name.

Go, take him away, I say, and strike off his head presently, and then break into his son-in-law's house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off his head, and bring them both upon two poles hither.

Ah, countrymen! if when you make your prayers, God should be so obdurate as yourselves, How would it fare with your departed souls? And therefore yet relent, and save my life.

My lord, when shall we go to Cheapside and take up commodities upon our bills? Marry, presently.

O, brave! Re-enter one with the heads But is not this braver? Let them kiss one another, for they loved well when they were alive.

Now part them again, lest they consult about the giving up of some more towns in France.

Soldiers, defer the spoil of the city until night: for with these borne before us, instead of maces, will we ride through the streets, and at every corner have them kiss.

Better ten thousand base-born Cades miscarry Than you should stoop unto a Frenchman's mercy.

To France, to France, and get what you have lost, Spare England, for it is your native coast, Henry hath money, you are strong and manly, God on our side, doubt not of victory.

A Clifford! a Clifford! we'll follow the king and Clifford.

Was ever feather so lightly blown to and fro as this multitude? The name of Henry the Fifth hales them to an hundred mischiefs, and makes them leave me desolate.

I see them lay their heads together to surprise me.

In despite of the devils and hell, have through the very middest of you? and heavens and honour be witness, that no want of resolution in me.

but only my followers' base and ignominious treasons, makes me betake me to my heels.

What, is he fled? Go some, and follow him, And he that brings his head unto the king Shall have a thousand crowns for his reward.

Follow me, soldiers: we'll devise a mean To reconcile you all unto the king.

Was never subject long'd to be a king As I do long and wish to be a subject.

Thus stands my state, 'twixt Cade and York distress'd.

Like to a ship that, having 'scaped a tempest, Is straightway calm'd and boarded with a pirate: But now is Cade driven back, his men dispersed, And now is York in arms to second him.

I pray thee, Buckingham, go and meet him, And ask him what's the reason of these arms.

Tell him I'll send Duke Edmund to the Tower, And, Somerset, we'll commit thee thither, Until his army be dismiss'd from him.

My lord, I'll yield myself to prison willingly, Or unto death, to do my country good.

In any case, be not too rough in terms, For he is fierce and cannot brook hard language.

I will, my lord, and doubt not so to deal As all things shall redound unto your good.

Come, wife, let's in, and learn to govern better, For yet may England curse my wretched reign.

Wherefore, on a brick wall have I climbed into this garden, to see if I can eat grass, or pick a sallet another while, which is not amiss to cool a man's stomach this hot weather.

Lord, who would live turmoiled in the court, And may enjoy such quiet walks as these? This small inheritance my father left me Contenteth me, and worth a monarchy.

I seek not to wax great by others' waning, Or gather wealth, I care not, with what envy: Sufficeth that I have maintains my state And sends the poor well pleased from my gate.

Here's the lord of the soil come to seize me for a stray, for entering his fee-simple without leave.

Look on me well: I have eat no meat these five days, yet, come thou and thy five men, and if I do not leave you all as dead as a doornail, I pray God I may never eat grass more.

Nay, it shall ne'er be said, while England stands, That Alexander Iden, an esquire of Kent, Took odds to combat a poor famish'd man.

As for words, whose greatness answers words, Let this my sword report what speech forbears.

CADE falls O, I am slain! famine and no other hath slain me: let ten thousand devils come against me, and give me but the ten meals I have lost, and I'll defy them all.

Wither, garden, and be henceforth a burying-place to all that do dwell in this house, because the unconquered soul of Cade is fled.

Tell Kent from me, she hath lost her best man, and exhort all the world to be cowards, for I, that never feared any, am vanquished by famine, not by valour.

Die, damned wretch, the curse of her that bare thee, And as I thrust thy body in with my sword, So wish I, I might thrust thy soul to hell.

From Ireland thus comes York to claim his right, And pluck the crown from feeble Henry's head: Ring, bells, aloud, burn, bonfires, clear and bright, To entertain great England's lawful king.

Ah! sancta majestas, who would not buy thee dear? Let them obey that know not how to rule, This hand was made to handle naught but gold.

I cannot give due action to my words, Except a sword or sceptre balance it: A sceptre shall it have, have I a soul, On which I'll toss the flower-de-luce of France.

Whom have we here? Buckingham, to disturb me? The king hath sent him, sure: I must dissemble.

O, I could hew up rocks and fight with flint, I am so angry at these abject terms, And now, like Ajax Telamonius, On sheep or oxen could I spend my fury.

The cause why I have brought this army hither Is to remove proud Somerset from the king, Seditious to his grace and to the state.

That is too much presumption on thy part: But if thy arms be to no other end, The king hath yielded unto thy demand: The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.

Upon thine honour, is he prisoner? Upon mine honour, he is prisoner.

Soldiers, I thank you all, disperse yourselves, Meet me to-morrow in St.

George's field, You shall have pay and every thing you wish.

York, I commend this kind submission: We twain will go into his highness' tent.

Buckingham, doth York intend no harm to us, That thus he marcheth with thee arm in arm? In all submission and humility York doth present himself unto your highness.

Then what intends these forces thou dost bring? To heave the traitor Somerset from hence, And fight against that monstrous rebel Cade, Who since I heard to be discomfited.

If one so rude and of so mean condition May pass into the presence of a king, Lo, I present your grace a traitor's head, The head of Cade, whom I in combat slew.

The head of Cade! Great God, how just art Thou! O, let me view his visage, being dead, That living wrought me such exceeding trouble.

Tell me, my friend, art thou the man that slew him? I was, an't like your majesty.

How art thou call'd? and what is thy degree? Alexander Iden, that's my name, A poor esquire of Kent, that loves his king.

So please it you, my lord, 'twere not amiss He were created knight for his good service.

We give thee for reward a thousand marks, And will that thou henceforth attend on us.

And never live but true unto his liege! See, Buckingham, Somerset comes with the queen: Go, bid her hide him quickly from the duke.

For thousand Yorks he shall not hide his head, But boldly stand and front him to his face.

How now! is Somerset at liberty? Then, York, unloose thy long-imprison'd thoughts, And let thy tongue be equal with thy heart.

That head of thine doth not become a crown, Thy hand is made to grasp a palmer's staff, And not to grace an awful princely sceptre.

That gold must round engirt these brows of mine, Whose smile and frown, like to Achilles' spear, Is able with the change to kill and cure.

Here is a hand to hold a sceptre up And with the same to act controlling laws.

Give place: by heaven, thou shalt rule no more O'er him whom heaven created for thy ruler.

O monstrous traitor! I arrest thee, York, Of capital treason 'gainst the king and crown, Obey, audacious traitor, kneel for grace.

Wouldst have me kneel? first let me ask of these, If they can brook I bow a knee to man.

Sirrah, call in my sons to be my bail, I know, ere they will have me go to ward, They'll pawn their swords for my enfranchisement.

Call hither Clifford! bid him come amain, To say if that the bastard boys of York Shall be the surety for their traitor father.

He is a traitor, let him to the Tower, And chop away that factious pate of his.

He is arrested, but will not obey, His sons, he says, shall give their words for him.

Will you not, sons? Ay, noble father, if our words will serve.

Why, what a brood of traitors have we here! Look in a glass, and call thy image so: I am thy king, and thou a false-heart traitor.

Call hither to the stake my two brave bears, That with the very shaking of their chains They may astonish these fell-lurking curs: Bid Salisbury and Warwick come to me.

Are these thy bears? we'll bait thy bears to death.

And manacle the bear-ward in their chains, If thou darest bring them to the baiting place.

Hence, heap of wrath, foul indigested lump, As crooked in thy manners as thy shape! Nay, we shall heat you thoroughly anon.

My lord, I have consider'd with myself The title of this most renowned duke, And in my conscience do repute his grace The rightful heir to England's royal seat.

Canst thou dispense with heaven for such an oath? It is great sin to swear unto a sin, But greater sin to keep a sinful oath.

Call Buckingham, and all the friends thou hast, I am resolved for death or dignity.

You were best to go to bed and dream again, To keep thee from the tempest of the field.

I am resolved to bear a greater storm Than any thou canst conjure up to-day, And that I'll write upon thy burgonet, Might I but know thee by thy household badge.

And from thy burgonet I'll rend thy bear And tread it under foot with all contempt, Despite the bear-ward that protects the bear.

And so to arms, victorious father, To quell the rebels and their complices.

Fie! charity, for shame! speak not in spite, For you shall sup with Jesu Christ to-night.

Hold, Warwick, seek thee out some other chase, For I myself must hunt this deer to death.

Then, nobly, York, 'tis for a crown thou fight'st.

As I intend, Clifford, to thrive to-day, It grieves my soul to leave thee unassail'd.

What seest thou in me, York? why dost thou pause? With thy brave bearing should I be in love, But that thou art so fast mine enemy.

Nor should thy prowess want praise and esteem, But that 'tis shown ignobly and in treason.

So let it help me now against thy sword As I in justice and true right express it.

My soul and body on the action both! A dreadful lay! Address thee instantly.

They fight, and CLIFFORD falls La fin couronne les oeuvres.

Thus war hath given thee peace, for thou art still.

Peace with his soul, heaven, if it be thy will! Shame and confusion! all is on the rout, Fear frames disorder, and disorder wounds Where it should guard.

O war, thou son of hell, Whom angry heavens do make their minister Throw in the frozen bosoms of our part Hot coals of vengeance! Let no soldier fly.

He that is truly dedicate to war Hath no self-love, nor he that loves himself Hath not essentially but by circumstance The name of valour.

York not our old men spares, No more will I their babes: tears virginal Shall be to me even as the dew to fire, And beauty that the tyrant oft reclaims Shall to my flaming wrath be oil and flax.

Henceforth I will not have to do with pity: Meet I an infant of the house of York, Into as many gobbets will I cut it As wild Medea young Absyrtus did: In cruelty will I seek out my fame.

Come, thou new ruin of old Clifford's house: As did AEneas old Anchises bear, So bear I thee upon my manly shoulders, But then AEneas bare a living load, Nothing so heavy as these woes of mine.

So, lie thou there, For underneath an alehouse' paltry sign, The Castle in Saint Alban's, Somerset Hath made the wizard famous in his death.

Sword, hold thy temper, heart, be wrathful still: Priests pray for enemies, but princes kill.

Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, and others Away, my lord! you are slow, for shame, away! Can we outrun the heavens? good Margaret, stay.

What are you made of? you'll nor fight nor fly: Now is it manhood, wisdom and defence, To give the enemy way, and to secure us By what we can, which can no more but fly.

Re-enter YOUNG CLIFFORD But that my heart's on future mischief set, I would speak blasphemy ere bid you fly: But fly you must, uncurable discomfit Reigns in the hearts of all our present parts.

Away, for your relief! and we will live To see their day and them our fortune give: Away, my lord, away! Alarum.

Now, by my sword, well hast thou fought to-day, By the mass, so did we all.

I thank you, Richard: God knows how long it is I have to live, And it hath pleased him that three times to-day You have defended me from imminent death.

Well, lords, we have not got that which we have: 'Tis not enough our foes are this time fled, Being opposites of such repairing nature.

I know our safety is to follow them, For, as I hear, the king is fled to London, To call a present court of parliament.

What says Lord Warwick? shall we after them? After them! nay, before them, if we can.

Now, by my faith, lords, 'twas a glorious day: Saint Alban's battle won by famous York Shall be eternized in all age to come.

Sound drums and trumpets, and to London all: And more such days as these to us befall! Alarum.

Enter YORK, EDWARD, RICHARD, NORFOLK, MONTAGUE, WARWICK, and Soldiers I wonder how the king escaped our hands.

Lord Stafford's father, Duke of Buckingham, Is either slain or wounded dangerously, I cleft his beaver with a downright blow: That this is true, father, behold his blood.

And, brother, here's the Earl of Wiltshire's blood, Whom I encounter'd as the battles join'd.

Throwing down SOMERSET's head Richard hath best deserved of all my sons.

But is your grace dead, my Lord of Somerset? Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt! Thus do I hope to shake King Henry's head.

Victorious Prince of York, Before I see thee seated in that throne Which now the house of Lancaster usurps, I vow by heaven these eyes shall never close.

Thanks, gentle Norfolk: stay by me, my lords, And, soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night.

They go up And when the king comes, offer no violence, Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.

The queen this day here holds her parliament, But little thinks we shall be of her council: By words or blows here let us win our right.

The bloody parliament shall this be call'd, Unless Plantagenet, Duke of York, be king, And bashful Henry deposed, whose cowardice Hath made us by-words to our enemies.

Then leave me not, my lords, be resolute, I mean to take possession of my right.

Neither the king, nor he that loves him best, The proudest he that holds up Lancaster, Dares stir a wing, if Warwick shake his bells.

I'll plant Plantagenet, root him up who dares: Resolve thee, Richard, claim the English crown.

And thine, Lord Clifford, and you both have vow'd revenge On him, his sons, his favourites and his friends.

If I be not, heavens be revenged on me! The hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in steel.

What, shall we suffer this? let's pluck him down: My heart for anger burns, I cannot brook it.

Patience is for poltroons, such as he: He durst not sit there, had your father lived.

My gracious lord, here in the parliament Let us assail the family of York.

Ah, know you not the city favours them, And they have troops of soldiers at their beck? But when the duke is slain, they'll quickly fly.

Far be the thought of this from Henry's heart, To make a shambles of the parliament-house! Cousin of Exeter, frowns, words and threats Shall be the war that Henry means to use.

Thou factious Duke of York, descend my throne, and kneel for grace and mercy at my feet, I am thy sovereign.

Exeter, thou art a traitor to the crown In following this usurping Henry.

Whom should he follow but his natural king? True, Clifford, and that's Richard Duke of York.

And shall I stand, and thou sit in my throne? It must and shall be so: content thyself.

He is both king and Duke of Lancaster, And that the Lord of Westmoreland shall maintain.

You forget That we are those which chased you from the field And slew your fathers, and with colours spread March'd through the city to the palace gates.

Yes, Warwick, I remember it to my grief, And, by his soul, thou and thy house shall rue it.

Plantagenet, of thee and these thy sons, Thy kinsman and thy friends, I'll have more lives Than drops of blood were in my father's veins.

Urge it no more, lest that, instead of words, I send thee, Warwick, such a messenger As shall revenge his death before I stir.

Poor Clifford! how I scorn his worthless threats! Will you we show our title to the crown? If not, our swords shall plead it in the field.

The lord protector lost it, and not I: When I was crown'd I was but nine months old.

You are old enough now, and yet, methinks, you lose.

Good brother, as thou lovest and honourest arms, Let's fight it out and not stand cavilling thus.

Sons, peace! Peace, thou! and give King Henry leave to speak.

Plantagenet shall speak first: hear him, lords, And be you silent and attentive too, For he that interrupts him shall not live.

Why faint you, lords? My title's good, and better far than his.

He rose against him, being his sovereign, And made him to resign his crown perforce.

Suppose, my lords, he did it unconstrain'd, Think you 'twere prejudicial to his crown? No, for he could not so resign his crown But that the next heir should succeed and reign.

Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter? His is the right, and therefore pardon me.

Why whisper you, my lords, and answer not? My conscience tells me he is lawful king.

Plantagenet, for all the claim thou lay'st, Think not that Henry shall be so deposed.

Thou art deceived: 'tis not thy southern power, Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent, Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud, Can set the duke up in despite of me.

He stamps with his foot and the soldiers show themselves My Lord of Warwick, hear me but one word: Let me for this my life-time reign as king.

Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs, And thou shalt reign in quiet while thou livest.

I am content: Richard Plantagenet, Enjoy the kingdom after my decease.

Farewell, faint-hearted and degenerate king, In whose cold blood no spark of honour bides.

Ah, Exeter! Why should you sigh, my lord? Not for myself, Lord Warwick, but my son, Whom I unnaturally shall disinherit.

And long live thou and these thy forward sons! Now York and Lancaster are reconciled.

Accursed be he that seeks to make them foes! Sennet.

Here they come down Farewell, my gracious lord, I'll to my castle.

Here comes the queen, whose looks bewray her anger: I'll steal away.

Father, you cannot disinherit me: If you be king, why should not I succeed? Pardon me, Margaret, pardon me, sweet son: The Earl of Warwick and the duke enforced me.

Enforced thee! art thou king, and wilt be forced? I shame to hear thee speak.

Ah, timorous wretch! Thou hast undone thyself, thy son and me, And given unto the house of York such head As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance.

Had I been there, which am a silly woman, The soldiers should have toss'd me on their pikes Before I would have granted to that act.

The northern lords that have forsworn thy colours Will follow mine, if once they see them spread, And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace And utter ruin of the house of York.

Come, son, let's away, Our army is ready, come, we'll after them.

Gentle son Edward, thou wilt stay with me? Ay, to be murder'd by his enemies.

When I return with victory from the field I'll see your grace: till then I'll follow her.

Why, how now, sons and brother! at a strife? What is your quarrel? how began it first? No quarrel, but a slight contention.

About what? About that which concerns your grace and us, The crown of England, father, which is yours.

Now you are heir, therefore enjoy it now: By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe, It will outrun you, father, in the end.

But for a kingdom any oath may be broken: I would break a thousand oaths to reign one year.

Therefore, to arms! And, father, do but think How sweet a thing it is to wear a crown, Within whose circuit is Elysium And all that poets feign of bliss and joy.

Why do we finger thus? I cannot rest Until the white rose that I wear be dyed Even in the lukewarm blood of Henry's heart.

Brother, thou shalt to London presently, And whet on Warwick to this enterprise.

Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk, And tell him privily of our intent.

You Edward, shall unto my Lord Cobham, With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise: In them I trust, for they are soldiers, Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit.

Brother, I go, I'll win them, fear it not: And thus most humbly I do take my leave.

Sir John and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine uncles, You are come to Sandal in a happy hour, The army of the queen mean to besiege us.

Five men to twenty! though the odds be great, I doubt not, uncle, of our victory.

Many a battle have I won in France, When as the enemy hath been ten to one: Why should I not now have the like success? Alarum.

Enter RUTLAND and his Tutor Ah, whither shall I fly to 'scape their hands? Ah, tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes! Chaplain, away! thy priesthood saves thy life.

As for the brat of this accursed duke, Whose father slew my father, he shall die.

Soldiers, away with him! Ah, Clifford, murder not this innocent child, Lest thou be hated both of God and man! How now! is he dead already? or is it fear That makes him close his eyes? I'll open them.

So looks the pent-up lion o'er the wretch That trembles under his devouring paws, And so he walks, insulting o'er his prey, And so he comes, to rend his limbs asunder.

Ah, gentle Clifford, kill me with thy sword, And not with such a cruel threatening look.

I am too mean a subject for thy wrath: Be thou revenged on men, and let me live.

In vain thou speak'st, poor boy, my father's blood Hath stopp'd the passage where thy words should enter.

Then let my father's blood open it again: He is a man, and, Clifford, cope with him.

The sight of any of the house of York Is as a fury to torment my soul, And till I root out their accursed line And leave not one alive, I live in hell.

Lifting his hand O, let me pray before I take my death! To thee I pray, sweet Clifford, pity me! Such pity as my rapier's point affords.

I never did thee harm: why wilt thou slay me? Thy father hath.

Thou hast one son, for his sake pity me, Lest in revenge thereof, sith God is just, He be as miserably slain as I.

Ah, let me live in prison all my days, And when I give occasion of offence, Then let me die, for now thou hast no cause.

No cause! Thy father slew my father, therefore, die.

My sons, God knows what hath bechanced them: But this I know, they have demean'd themselves Like men born to renown by life or death.

Come, bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland, I dare your quenchless fury to more rage: I am your butt, and I abide your shot.

Ay, to such mercy as his ruthless arm, With downright payment, show'd unto my father.

Now Phaethon hath tumbled from his car, And made an evening at the noontide prick.

My ashes, as the phoenix, may bring forth A bird that will revenge upon you all: And in that hope I throw mine eyes to heaven, Scorning whate'er you can afflict me with.

Hold, valiant Clifford! for a thousand causes I would prolong awhile the traitor's life.

They lay hands on YORK, who struggles Ay, ay, so strives the woodcock with the gin.

So triumph thieves upon their conquer'd booty, So true men yield, with robbers so o'ermatch'd.

Alas poor York! but that I hate thee deadly, I should lament thy miserable state.

What, hath thy fiery heart so parch'd thine entrails That not a tear can fall for Rutland's death? Why art thou patient, man? thou shouldst be mad, And I, to make thee mad, do mock thee thus.

Thou wouldst be fee'd, I see, to make me sport: York cannot speak, unless he wear a crown.

A crown for York! and, lords, bow low to him: Hold you his hands, whilst I do set it on.

Putting a paper crown on his head Ay, marry, sir, now looks he like a king! Ay, this is he that took King Henry's chair, And this is he was his adopted heir.

But how is it that great Plantagenet Is crown'd so soon, and broke his solemn oath? As I bethink me, you should not be king Till our King Henry had shook hands with death.

To tell thee whence thou camest, of whom derived, Were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless.

Thy father bears the type of King of Naples, Of both the Sicils and Jerusalem, Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman.

Hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult? It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen, Unless the adage must be verified, That beggars mounted run their horse to death.

Bids't thou me rage? why, now thou hast thy wish: Wouldst have me weep? why, now thou hast thy will: For raging wind blows up incessant showers, And when the rage allays, the rain begins.

That face of his the hungry cannibals Would not have touch'd, would not have stain'd with blood: But you are more inhuman, more inexorable, O, ten times more, than tigers of Hyrcania.

See, ruthless queen, a hapless father's tears: This cloth thou dip'dst in blood of my sweet boy, And I with tears do wash the blood away.

What, weeping-ripe, my Lord Northumberland? Think but upon the wrong he did us all, And that will quickly dry thy melting tears.

Stabbing him And here's to right our gentle-hearted king.

Stabbing him Open Thy gate of mercy, gracious God! My soul flies through these wounds to seek out Thee.

Off with his head, and set it on York gates, So York may overlook the town of York.

How fares my brother? why is he so sad? I cannot joy, until I be resolved Where our right valiant father is become.

I saw him in the battle range about, And watch'd him how he singled Clifford forth.

So fared our father with his enemies, So fled his enemies my warlike father: Methinks, 'tis prize enough to be his son.

See, see! they join, embrace, and seem to kiss, As if they vow'd some league inviolable: Now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun.

'Tis wondrous strange, the like yet never heard of.

Whate'er it bodes, henceforward will I bear Upon my target three fair-shining suns.

Nay, bear three daughters: by your leave I speak it, You love the breeder better than the male.

Environed he was with many foes, And stood against them, as the hope of Troy Against the Greeks that would have enter'd Troy.

But Hercules himself must yield to odds, And many strokes, though with a little axe, Hew down and fell the hardest-timber'd oak.

Sweet Duke of York, our prop to lean upon, Now thou art gone, we have no staff, no stay.

O Clifford, boisterous Clifford! thou hast slain The flower of Europe for his chivalry, And treacherously hast thou vanquish'd him, For hand to hand he would have vanquish'd thee.

To weep is to make less the depth of grief: Tears then for babes, blows and revenge for me Richard, I bear thy name, I'll venge thy death, Or die renowned by attempting it.

His name that valiant duke hath left with thee, His dukedom and his chair with me is left.

Nay, if thou be that princely eagle's bird, Show thy descent by gazing 'gainst the sun: For chair and dukedom, throne and kingdom say, Either that is thine, or else thou wert not his.

O valiant lord, the Duke of York is slain! O Warwick, Warwick! that Plantagenet, Which held three dearly as his soul's redemption, Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.

Ten days ago I drown'd these news in tears, And now, to add more measure to your woes, I come to tell you things sith then befall'n.

After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought, Where your brave father breathed his latest gasp, Tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run, Were brought me of your loss and his depart.

'Twas odds, belike, when valiant Warwick fled: Oft have I heard his praises in pursuit, But ne'er till now his scandal of retire.

I know it well, Lord Warwick, blame me not: 'Tis love I bear thy glories makes me speak.

Why, therefore Warwick came to seek you out, And therefore comes my brother Montague.

The proud insulting queen, With Clifford and the haught Northumberland, And of their feather many more proud birds, Have wrought the easy-melting king like wax.

He swore consent to your succession, His oath enrolled in the parliament, And now to London all the crew are gone, To frustrate both his oath and what beside May make against the house of Lancaster.

Ay, now methinks I hear great Warwick speak: Ne'er may he live to see a sunshine day, That cries 'Retire,' if Warwick bid him stay.

King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague, Stay we no longer, dreaming of renown, But sound the trumpets, and about our task.

Then, Clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel, As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds, I come to pierce it, or to give thee mine.

Then strike up drums: God and Saint George for us! How now! what news? The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me, The queen is coming with a puissant host, And craves your company for speedy counsel.

Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET,  PRINCE EDWARD, CLIFFORD, and NORTHUMBERLAND, with drum and trumpets Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.

Withhold revenge, dear God! 'tis not my fault, Nor wittingly have I infringed my vow.

My gracious liege, this too much lenity And harmful pity must be laid aside.

To whom do lions cast their gentle looks? Not to the beast that would usurp their den.

Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick? Not his that spoils her young before her face.

Who 'scapes the lurking serpent's mortal sting? Not he that sets his foot upon her back.

The smallest worm will turn being trodden on, And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.

Full well hath Clifford play'd the orator, Inferring arguments of mighty force.

Ah, cousin York! would thy best friends did know How it doth grieve me that thy head is here! My lord, cheer up your spirits: our foes are nigh, And this soft courage makes your followers faint.

You promised knighthood to our forward son: Unsheathe your sword, and dub him presently.

Edward Plantagenet, arise a knight, And learn this lesson, draw thy sword in right.

My gracious father, by your kingly leave, I'll draw it as apparent to the crown, And in that quarrel use it to the death.

I would your highness would depart the field: The queen hath best success when you are absent.

My royal father, cheer these noble lords And hearten those that fight in your defence: Unsheathe your sword, good father, cry 'Saint George!' March.

And reason too: Who should succeed the father but the son? Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak! Ay, crook-back, here I stand to answer thee, Or any he the proudest of thy sort.

'Twas you that kill'd young Rutland, was it not? Ay, and old York, and yet not satisfied.

What say'st thou, Henry, wilt thou yield the crown? Why, how now, long-tongued Warwick! dare you speak? When you and I met at Saint Alban's last, Your legs did better service than your hands.

Break off the parley, for scarce I can refrain The execution of my big-swoln heart Upon that Clifford, that cruel child-killer.

I slew thy father, call'st thou him a child? Ay, like a dastard and a treacherous coward, As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland, But ere sunset I'll make thee curse the deed.

Have done with words, my lords, and hear me speak.

I prithee, give no limits to my tongue: I am a king, and privileged to speak.

My liege, the wound that bred this meeting here Cannot be cured by words, therefore be still.

Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword: By him that made us all, I am resolved that Clifford's manhood lies upon his tongue.

Say, Henry, shall I have my right, or no? A thousand men have broke their fasts to-day, That ne'er shall dine unless thou yield the crown.

If thou deny, their blood upon thy head, For York in justice puts his armour on.

If that be right which Warwick says is right, There is no wrong, but every thing is right.

Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands, For, well I wot, thou hast thy mother's tongue.

But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam, But like a foul mis-shapen stigmatic, Mark'd by the destinies to be avoided, As venom toads, or lizards' dreadful stings.

Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou, Although thy husband may be Menelaus, And ne'er was Agamemnon's brother wrong'd By that false woman, as this king by thee.

For what hath broach'd this tumult but thy pride? Hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept, And we, in pity of the gentle king, Had slipp'd our claim until another age.

And, in this resolution, I defy thee, Not willing any longer conference, Since thou deniest the gentle king to speak.

Sound trumpets! let our bloody colours wave! And either victory, or else a grave.

No, wrangling woman, we'll no longer stay: These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.

Smile, gentle heaven! or strike, ungentle death! For this world frowns, and Edward's sun is clouded.

Then let the earth be drunken with our blood: I'll kill my horse, because I will not fly.

Brother, give me thy hand, and, gentle Warwick, Let me embrace thee in my weary arms: I, that did never weep, now melt with woe That winter should cut off our spring-time so.

Enter RICHARD and CLIFFORD Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone: Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York, And this for Rutland, both bound to revenge, Wert thou environ'd with a brazen wall.

WARWICK comes, CLIFFORD flies Nay Warwick, single out some other chase, For I myself will hunt this wolf to death.

To whom God will, there be the victory! For Margaret my queen, and Clifford too, Have chid me from the battle, swearing both They prosper best of all when I am thence.

And to conclude, the shepherd's homely curds, His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle.

Enter a Son that has killed his father, dragging in the dead body Ill blows the wind that profits nobody.

Who's this? O God! it is my father's face, Whom in this conflict I unwares have kill'd.

Pardon me, God, I knew not what I did! And pardon, father, for I knew not thee! My tears shall wipe away these bloody marks, And no more words till they have flow'd their fill.

O piteous spectacle! O bloody times! Whiles lions war and battle for their dens, Poor harmless lambs abide their enmity.

Weep, wretched man, I'll aid thee tear for tear, And let our hearts and eyes, like civil war, Be blind with tears, and break o'ercharged with grief.

Thou that so stoutly hast resisted me, Give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold: For I have bought it with an hundred blows.

I'll bear thee hence, and let them fight that will, For I have murdered where I should not kill.

Sad-hearted men, much overgone with care, Here sits a king more woful than you are.

Enter QUEEN MARGARET, PRINCE EDWARD, and EXETER Fly, father, fly! for all your friends are fled, And Warwick rages like a chafed bull: Away! for death doth hold us in pursuit.

Away! for vengeance comes along with them: Nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed, Or else come after: I'll away before.

Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter: Not that I fear to stay, but love to go Whither the queen intends.

Enter CLIFFORD, wounded Here burns my candle out, ay, here it dies, Which, whiles it lasted, gave King Henry light.

O Lancaster, I fear thy overthrow More than my body's parting with my soul! My love and fear glued many friends to thee, And, now I fall, thy tough commixture melts.

The air hath got into my deadly wounds, And much effuse of blood doth make me faint.

Come, York and Richard, Warwick and the rest, I stabb'd your fathers' bosoms, split my breast.

Enter EDWARD, GEORGE, RICHARD, MONTAGUE, WARWICK, and Soldiers Now breathe we, lords: good fortune bids us pause, And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.

Some troops pursue the bloody-minded queen, That led calm Henry, though he were a king, As doth a sail, fill'd with a fretting gust, Command an argosy to stem the waves.

CLIFFORD groans, and dies Whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave? A deadly groan, like life and death's departing.

See who it is: and, now the battle's ended, If friend or foe, let him be gently used.

From off the gates of York fetch down the head, Your father's head, which Clifford placed there, Instead whereof let this supply the room: Measure for measure must be answered.

Bring forth that fatal screech-owl to our house, That nothing sung but death to us and ours: Now death shall stop his dismal threatening sound, And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.

Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee? Dark cloudy death o'ershades his beams of life, And he nor sees nor hears us what we say.

O, would he did! and so perhaps he doth: 'Tis but his policy to counterfeit, Because he would avoid such bitter taunts Which in the time of death he gave our father.

Where's Captain Margaret, to fence you now? They mock thee, Clifford: swear as thou wast wont.

What, not an oath? nay, then the world goes hard When Clifford cannot spare his friends an oath.

Ay, but he's dead: off with the traitor's head, And rear it in the place your father's stands.

First will I see the coronation, And then to Brittany I'll cross the sea, To effect this marriage, so it please my lord.

Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be, For in thy shoulder do I build my seat, And never will I undertake the thing Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.

Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester, And George, of Clarence: Warwick, as ourself, Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.

Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester, For Gloucester's dukedom is too ominous.

Tut, that's a foolish observation: Richard, be Duke of Gloucester.

Now to London, To see these honours in possession.

Under this thick-grown brake we'll shroud ourselves, For through this laund anon the deer will come, And in this covert will we make our stand, Culling the principal of all the deer.

That cannot be, the noise of thy cross-bow Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.

Here stand we both, and aim we at the best: And, for the time shall not seem tedious, I'll tell thee what befell me on a day In this self-place where now we mean to stand.

From Scotland am I stol'n, even of pure love, To greet mine own land with my wishful sight.

Let me embrace thee, sour adversity, For wise men say it is the wisest course.

Ay, but she's come to beg, Warwick to give, She, on his left side, craving aid for Henry, He, on his right, asking a wife for Edward.

But did you never swear, and break an oath? No, never such an oath, nor will not now.

Where did you dwell when I was King of England? Here in this country, where we now remain.

But do not break your oaths, for of that sin My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.

Go where you will, the king shall be commanded, And be you kings, command, and I'll obey.

So would you be again to Henry, If he were seated as King Edward is.

We charge you, in God's name, and the king's, To go with us unto the officers.

In God's name, lead, your king's name be obey'd: And what God will, that let your king perform, And what he will, I humbly yield unto.

Your highness shall do well to grant her suit, It were dishonour to deny it her.

I see the lady hath a thing to grant, Before the king will grant her humble suit.

he keeps the wind! Widow, we will consider of your suit, And come some other time to know our mind.

Right gracious lord, I cannot brook delay: May it please your highness to resolve me now, And what your pleasure is, shall satisfy me.

you all your lands, An if what pleases him shall pleasure you.

Fight closer, or, good faith, you'll catch a blow.

'Twere pity they should lose their father's lands.

you will have leave, Till youth take leave and leave you to the crutch.

GLOUCESTER and CLARENCE retire Now tell me, madam, do you love your children? Ay, full as dearly as I love myself.

And would you not do much to do them good? To do them good, I would sustain some harm.

What service wilt thou do me, if I give them? What you command, that rests in me to do.

Why stops my lord, shall I not hear my task? An easy task, 'tis but to love a king.

Why, then, thy husband's lands I freely give thee.

What love, think'st thou, I sue so much to get? My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers, That love which virtue begs and virtue grants.

My mind will never grant what I perceive Your highness aims at, if I aim aright.

Why, then thou shalt not have thy husband's lands.

Why, then mine honesty shall be my dower, For by that loss I will not purchase them.

But, mighty lord, this merry inclination Accords not with the sadness of my suit: Please you dismiss me either with 'ay' or 'no.

Ay, if thou wilt say 'ay' to my request, No if thou dost say 'no' to my demand.

Her words do show her wit incomparable, All her perfections challenge sovereignty: One way or other, she is for a king, And she shall be my love, or else my queen.

- Say that King Edward take thee for his queen? 'Tis better said than done, my gracious lord: I am a subject fit to jest withal, But far unfit to be a sovereign.

Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee I speak no more than what my soul intends, And that is, to enjoy thee for my love.

And that is more than I will yield unto: I know I am too mean to be your queen, And yet too good to be your concubine.

'Twill grieve your grace my sons should call you father.

Thou art a widow, and thou hast some children, And, by God's mother, I, being but a bachelor, Have other some: why, 'tis a happy thing To be the father unto many sons.

Well, jest on, brothers: I can tell you both Her suit is granted for her husband's lands.

My gracious lord, Henry your foe is taken, And brought your prisoner to your palace gate.

See that he be convey'd unto the Tower: And go we, brothers, to the man that took him, To question of his apprehension.

Lords, use her honourably. Ay, Edward will use women honourably.

My eye's too quick, my heart o'erweens too much, Unless my hand and strength could equal them.

Why, I can smile, and murder whiles I smile, And cry 'Content' to that which grieves my heart, And wet my cheeks with artificial tears, And frame my face to all occasions.

I can add colours to the chameleon, Change shapes with Proteus for advantages, And set the murderous Machiavel to school.

Can I do this, and cannot get a crown? Tut, were it farther off, I'll pluck it down.

No, mighty King of France: now Margaret Must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve Where kings command.

Why, say, fair queen, whence springs this deep despair? From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears And stops my tongue, while heart is drown'd in cares.

Whate'er it be, be thou still like thyself, And sit thee by our side: Seats her by him Yield not thy neck To fortune's yoke, but let thy dauntless mind Still ride in triumph over all mischance.

Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief, It shall be eased, if France can yield relief.

Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak.

Renowned queen, with patience calm the storm, While we bethink a means to break it off.

And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow! What's he approacheth boldly to our presence? Our Earl of Warwick, Edward's greatest friend.

Welcome, brave Warwick! What brings thee to France? He descends.

She ariseth Ay, now begins a second storm to rise, For this is he that moves both wind and tide.

King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak, Before you answer Warwick.

Look, therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour, For though usurpers sway the rule awhile, Yet heavens are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.

Injurious Margaret! And why not queen? Because thy father Henry did usurp, And thou no more are prince than she is queen.

Oxford, how haps it, in this smooth discourse, You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost All that which Henry Fifth had gotten? Methinks these peers of France should smile at that.

But for the rest, you tell a pedigree Of threescore and two years, a silly time To make prescription for a kingdom's worth.

Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford, Vouchsafe, at our request, to stand aside, While I use further conference with Warwick.

But is he gracious in the people's eye? The more that Henry was unfortunate.

Then further, all dissembling set aside, Tell me for truth the measure of his love Unto our sister Bona.

Such it seems As may beseem a monarch like himself.

Your grant, or your denial, shall be mine: To WARWICK Yet I confess that often ere this day, When I have heard your king's desert recounted, Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.

Then, Warwick, thus: our sister shall be Edward's, And now forthwith shall articles be drawn Touching the jointure that your king must make, Which with her dowry shall be counterpoised.

Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness That Bona shall be wife to the English king.

Deceitful Warwick! it was thy device By this alliance to make void my suit: Before thy coming Lewis was Henry's friend.

And still is friend to him and Margaret: But if your title to the crown be weak, As may appear by Edward's good success, Then 'tis but reason that I be released From giving aid which late I promised.

Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand That your estate requires and mine can yield.

Henry now lives in Scotland at his ease, Where having nothing, nothing can he lose.

And as for you yourself, our quondam queen, You have a father able to maintain you, And better 'twere you troubled him than France.

Post blows a horn within Warwick, this is some post to us or thee.

Sent from your brother, Marquess Montague: To KING LEWIS XI These from our king unto your majesty: To QUEEN MARGARET And, madam, these for you, from whom I know not.

They all read their letters I like it well that our fair queen and mistress Smiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his.

Nay, mark how Lewis stamps, as he were nettled: I hope all's for the best.

Warwick, what are thy news? and yours, fair queen? Mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys.

My noble queen, let former grudges pass, And henceforth I am thy true servitor: I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bona, And replant Henry in his former state.

Warwick, these words have turn'd my hate to love, And I forgive and quite forget old faults, And joy that thou becomest King Henry's friend.

Therefore at last I firmly am resolved You shall have aid.

Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly, I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.

Tell him, my mourning weeds are laid aside, And I am ready to put armour on.

Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong, And therefore I'll uncrown him ere't be long.

But, Warwick, Thou and Oxford, with five thousand men, Shall cross the seas, and bid false Edward battle, And, as occasion serves, this noble queen And prince shall follow with a fresh supply.

Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous, Therefore delay not, give thy hand to Warwick, And, with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable, That only Warwick's daughter shall be thine.

Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it, And here, to pledge my vow, I give my hand.

He gives his hand to WARWICK Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied, And thou, Lord Bourbon, our high admiral, Shalt waft them over with our royal fleet.

I long till Edward fall by war's mischance, For mocking marriage with a dame of France.

I came from Edward as ambassador, But I return his sworn and mortal foe: Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me, But dreadful war shall answer his demand.

Had he none else to make a stale but me? Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow.

I was the chief that raised him to the crown, And I'll be chief to bring him down again: Not that I pity Henry's misery, But seek revenge on Edward's mockery.

Suppose they take offence without a cause, They are but Lewis and Warwick: I am Edward, Your king and Warwick's, and must have my will.

And shall have your will, because our king: Yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well.

Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too? Not I: No, God forbid that I should wish them sever'd Whom God hath join'd together, ay, and 'twere pity To sunder them that yoke so well together.

Setting your scorns and your mislike aside, Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey Should not become my wife and England's queen.

And you too, Somerset and Montague, Speak freely what you think.

Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis Becomes your enemy, for mocking him About the marriage of the Lady Bona.

And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge, Is now dishonoured by this new marriage.

Why, knows not Montague that of itself England is safe, if true within itself? But the safer when 'tis back'd with France.

For this one speech Lord Hastings well deserves To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.

Ay, what of that? it was my will and grant, And for this once my will shall stand for law.

Or else you would not have bestow'd the heir Of the Lord Bonville on your new wife's son, And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.

Alas, poor Clarence! is it for a wife That thou art malcontent? I will provide thee.

In choosing for yourself, you show'd your judgment, Which being shallow, you give me leave To play the broker in mine own behalf, And to that end I shortly mind to leave you.

Leave me, or tarry, Edward will be king, And not be tied unto his brother's will.

But as this title honours me and mine, So your dislike, to whom I would be pleasing, Doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow.

Now, messenger, what letters or what news From France? My sovereign liege, no letters, and few words, But such as I, without your special pardon, Dare not relate.

Go to, we pardon thee: therefore, in brief, Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.

But what said Lady Bona to my marriage? These were her words, utter'd with mad disdain: 'Tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly, I'll wear the willow garland for his sake.

I blame not her, she could say little less, She had the wrong.

But what said Henry's queen? For I have heard that she was there in place.

'Tell him,' quoth she, 'my mourning weeds are done, And I am ready to put armour on.

Ha! durst the traitor breathe out so proud words? Well I will arm me, being thus forewarn'd: They shall have wars and pay for their presumption.

But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret? Ay, gracious sovereign, they are so link'd in That young Prince Edward marries Warwick's daughter.

Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast, For I will hence to Warwick's other daughter, That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage I may not prove inferior to yourself.

My thoughts aim at a further matter, I Stay not for the love of Edward, but the crown.

Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick! Yet am I arm'd against the worst can happen, And haste is needful in this desperate case.

Pembroke and Stafford, you in our behalf Go levy men, and make prepare for war, They are already, or quickly will be landed: Myself in person will straight follow you.

But, ere I go, Hastings and Montague, Resolve my doubt.

So God help Montague as he proves true! And Hastings as he favours Edward's cause! Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us? Ay, in despite of all that shall withstand you.

Now therefore let us hence, and lose no hour, Till we meet Warwick with his foreign power.

Trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well, The common people by numbers swarm to us.

But see where Somerset and Clarence come! Speak suddenly, my lords, are we all friends? Fear not that, my lord.

You that will follow me to this attempt, Applaud the name of Henry with your leader.

What, will he not to bed? Why, no, for he hath made a solemn vow Never to lie and take his natural rest Till Warwick or himself be quite suppress'd.

To-morrow then belike shall be the day, If Warwick be so near as men report.

But say, I pray, what nobleman is that That with the king here resteth in his tent? 'Tis the Lord Hastings, the king's chiefest friend.

O, is it so? But why commands the king That his chief followers lodge in towns about him, While he himself keeps in the cold field? 'Tis the more honour, because more dangerous.

Ay, but give me worship and quietness, I like it better than a dangerous honour.

If Warwick knew in what estate he stands, 'Tis to be doubted he would waken him.

Ay, wherefore else guard we his royal tent, But to defend his person from night-foes? This is his tent, and see where stand his guard.

Courage, my masters! honour now or never! But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.

RICHARD and HASTINGS fly over the stage What are they that fly there? Richard and Hastings: let them go, here is The duke.

The duke! Why, Warwick, when we parted, Thou call'dst me king.

Ay, but the case is alter'd: When you disgraced me in my embassade, Then I degraded you from being king, And come now to create you Duke of York.

Then, for his mind, be Edward England's king: Takes off his crown But Henry now shall wear the English crown, And be true king indeed, thou but the shadow.

My Lord of Somerset, at my request, See that forthwith Duke Edward be convey'd Unto my brother, Archbishop of York.

When I have fought with Pembroke and his fellows, I'll follow you, and tell what answer Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him.

They lead him out forcibly What fates impose, that men must needs abide, It boots not to resist both wind and tide.

These news I must confess are full of grief, Yet, gracious madam, bear it as you may: Warwick may lose, that now hath won the day.

Come, therefore, let us fly while we may fly: If Warwick take us we are sure to die.

Now, my Lord Hastings and Sir William Stanley, Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither, Into this chiefest thicket of the park.

I have advertised him by secret means That if about this hour he make his way Under the colour of his usual game, He shall here find his friends with horse and men To set him free from his captivity.

Now, brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the rest, Stand you thus close, to steal the bishop's deer? Brother, the time and case requireth haste: Your horse stands ready at the park-corner.

But whither shall we then? To Lynn, my lord, And ship from thence to Flanders.

Well guess'd, believe me, for that was my meaning.

Huntsman, what say'st thou? wilt thou go along? Better do so than tarry and be hang'd.

Bishop, farewell: shield thee from Warwick's frown, And pray that I may repossess the crown.

But, Warwick, after God, thou set'st me free, And chiefly therefore I thank God and thee, He was the author, thou the instrument.

What answers Clarence to his sovereign's will? That he consents, if Warwick yield consent, For on thy fortune I repose myself.

And, Clarence, now then it is more than needful Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a traitor, And all his lands and goods be confiscate.

My Lord of Somerset, what youth is that, Of whom you seem to have so tender care? My liege, it is young Henry, earl of Richmond.

Lays his hand on his head If secret powers Suggest but truth to my divining thoughts, This pretty lad will prove our country's bliss.

His looks are full of peaceful majesty, His head by nature framed to wear a crown, His hand to wield a sceptre, and himself Likely in time to bless a regal throne.

Make much of him, my lords, for this is he Must help you more than you are hurt by me.

What news, my friend? That Edward is escaped from your brother, And fled, as he hears since, to Burgundy.

But let us hence, my sovereign, to provide A salve for any sore that may betide.

My lord, I like not of this flight of Edward's, For doubtless Burgundy will yield him help, And we shall have more wars before 't be long.

Ay, for if Edward repossess the crown, 'Tis like that Richmond with the rest shall down.

Tush, man, abodements must not now affright us: By fair or foul means we must enter in, For hither will our friends repair to us.

My lords, we were forewarned of your coming, And shut the gates for safety of ourselves, For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.

But, master mayor, if Henry be your king, Yet Edward at the least is Duke of York.

Why, and I challenge nothing but my dukedom, As being well content with that alone.

Why, master mayor, why stand you in a doubt? Open the gates, we are King Henry's friends.

So, master mayor: these gates must not be shut But in the night or in the time of war.

What! fear not, man, but yield me up the keys, Takes his keys For Edward will defend the town and thee, And all those friends that deign to follow me.

Enter MONTGOMERY, with drum and soldiers Brother, this is Sir John Montgomery, Our trusty friend, unless I be deceived.

Welcome, Sir John! But why come you in arms? To help King Edward in his time of storm, As every loyal subject ought to do.

Thanks, good Montgomery, but we now forget Our title to the crown and only claim Our dukedom till God please to send the rest.

Then fare you well, for I will hence again: I came to serve a king and not a duke.

The drum begins to march Nay, stay, Sir John, awhi le, and we'll debate By what safe means the crown may be recover'd.

Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand: The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.

Then be it as you will, for 'tis my right, And Henry but usurps the diadem.

Ay, now my sovereign speaketh like himself, And now will I be Edward's champion.

Sound trumpet, Edward shall be here proclaim'd: Come, fellow-soldier, make thou proclamation.

Edward the Fourth, by the grace of God, king of England and France, and lord of Ireland,  and c.

And whosoe'er gainsays King Edward's right, By this I challenge him to single fight.

Throws down his gauntlet Long live Edward the Fourth! Thanks, brave Montgomery, and thanks unto you all: If fortune serve me, I'll requite this kindness.

Ah, froward Clarence! how evil it beseems thee To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother! Yet, as we may, we'll meet both thee and Warwick.

Come on, brave soldiers: doubt not of the day, And, that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.

A little fire is quickly trodden out, Which, being suffer'd, rivers cannot quench.

My sovereign, with the loving citizens, Like to his island girt in with the ocean, Or modest Dian circled with her nymphs, Shall rest in London till we come to him.

Well-minded Clarence, be thou fortunate! Comfort, my lord, and so I take my leave.

Sweet Oxford, and my loving Montague, And all at once, once more a happy farewell.

Cousin of Exeter, what thinks your lordship? Methinks the power that Edward hath in field Should not be able to encounter mine.

'A Lancaster! A Lancaster!' Hark, hark, my lord! what shouts are these? Seize on the shame-faced Henry, bear him hence, And once again proclaim us King of England.

You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow: Now stops thy spring, my sea sha$l suck them dry, And swell so much the higher by their ebb.

And, lords, towards Coventry bend we our course Where peremptory Warwick now remains: The sun shines hot, and, if we use delay, Cold biting winter mars our hoped-for hay.

Away betimes, before his forces join, And take the great-grown traitor unawares: Brave warriors, march amain towards Coventry.

Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford? How far hence is thy lord, mine honest fellow? By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.

How far off is our brother Montague? Where is the post that came from Montague? By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.

Say, Somerville, what says my loving son? And, by thy guess, how nigh is Clarence now? At Southam I did leave him with his forces, And do expect him here some two hours hence.

Drum heard Then Clarence is at hand, I hear his drum.

It is not his, my lord, here Southam lies: The drum your honour hears marcheth from Warwick.

Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, and soldiers Go, trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle.

Nay, rather, wilt thou draw thy forces hence, Confess who set thee up and pluck'd thee own, Call Warwick patron and be penitent? And thou shalt still remain the Duke of York.

Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight: And weakling, Warwick takes his gift again, And Henry is my king, Warwick his subject.

Come, Warwick, take the time, kneel down, kneel down: Nay, when? strike now, or else the iron cools.

I had rather chop this hand off at a blow, And with the other fling it at thy face, Than bear so low a sail, to strike to thee.

O cheerful colours! see where Oxford comes! Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaster! He and his forces enter the city The gates are open, let us enter too.

Stand we in good array, for they no doubt Will issue out again and bid us battle: If not, the city being but of small defence, We'll quickly rouse the traitors in the same.

Montague, Montague, for Lancaster! He and his forces enter the city Thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear.

The harder match'd, the greater victory: My mind presageth happy gain and conquest.

And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee, And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.

Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends: And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults, For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.

Now welcome more, and ten times more beloved, Than if thou never hadst deserved our hate.

Lords, to the field, Saint George and victory! Alarum and excursions.

Enter KING EDWARD IV, bringing forth WARWICK wounded So, lie thou there: die thou, and die our fear, For Warwick was a bug that fear'd us all.

Now, Montague, sit fast, I seek for thee, That Warwick's bones may keep thine company.

Ah, who is nigh? come to me, friend or foe, And tell me who is victor, York or Warwick? Why ask I that? my mangled body shows, My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows.

That I must yield my body to the earth And, by my fall, the conquest to my foe.

Even now forsake me, and of all my lands Is nothing left me but my body's length.

Why, what is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust? And, live we how we can, yet die we must.

We might recover all our loss again, The queen from France hath brought a puissant power: Even now we heard the news: ah, could'st thou fly! Why, then I would not fly.

Ah, Montague, If thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand.

And with thy lips keep in my soul awhile! Thou lovest me not, for, brother, if thou didst, Thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood That glues my lips and will not let me speak.

Ah, Warwick! Montague hath breathed his last, And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick, And said 'Commend me to my valiant brother.

Away, away, to meet the queen's great power! Here they bear away his body.

Enter KING EDWARD IV in triumph, with GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and the rest Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course, And we are graced with wreaths of victory.

A little gale will soon disperse that cloud And blow it to the source from whence it came: The very beams will dry those vapours up, For every cloud engenders not a storm.

The queen is valued thirty thousand strong, And Somerset, with Oxford fled to her: If she have time to breathe be well assured Her faction will be full as strong as ours.

Enter QUEEN MARGARET, PRINCE EDWARD, SOMERSET, OXFORD, and soldiers Great lords, wise men ne'er sit and wail their loss, But cheerly seek how to redress their harms.

What though the mast be now blown overboard, The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost, And half our sailors swallow'd in the flood? Yet lives our pilot still.

And what is Edward but ruthless sea? What Clarence but a quicksand of deceit? And Richard but a ragged fatal rock? All these the enemies to our poor bark.

Say you can swim, alas, 'tis but a while! Tread on the sand, why, there you quickly sink: Bestride the rock, the tide will wash you off, Or else you famish, that's a threefold death.

This speak I, lords, to let you understand, If case some one of you would fly from us, That there's no hoped-for mercy with the brothers More than with ruthless waves, with sands and rocks.

Why, courage then! what cannot be avoided 'Twere childish weakness to lament or fear.

Methinks a woman of this valiant spirit Should, if a coward heard her speak these words, Infuse his breast with magnanimity And make him, naked, foil a man at arms.

I speak not this as doubting any here For did I but suspect a fearful man He should have leave to go away betimes, Lest in our need he might infect another And make him of like spirit to himself.

If any such be here--as God forbid!-- Let him depart before we need his help.

Women and children of so high a courage, And warriors faint! why, 'twere perpetual shame.

O brave young prince! thy famous grandfather Doth live again in thee: long mayst thou live To bear his image and renew his glories! And he that will not fight for such a hope.

Go home to bed, and like the owl by day, If he arise, be mock'd and wonder'd at.

I thought no less: it is his policy To haste thus fast, to find us unprovided.

You fight in justice: then, in God's name, lords, Be valiant and give signal to the fight.

Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE,  and soldiers, with QUEEN MARGARET, OXFORD, and SOMERSET, prisoners Now here a period of tumultuous broils.

Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight: For Somerset, off with his guilty head.

So part we sadly in this troublous world, To meet with joy in sweet Jerusalem.

Is proclamation made, that who finds Edward Shall have a high reward, and he his life? It is: and lo, where youthful Edward comes! Bring forth the gallant, let us hear him speak.

Ah, that thy father had been so resolved! That you might still have worn the petticoat, And ne'er have stol'n the breech from Lancaster.

Let AEsop fable in a winter's night, His currish riddles sort not with this place.

Stabs him Sprawl'st thou? take that, to end thy agony.

Stabs him And there's for twitting me with perjury.

Offers to kill her Hold, Richard, hold, for we have done too much.

Why should she live, to fill the world with words? What, doth she swoon? use means for her recovery.

Clarence, excuse me to the king my brother, I'll hence to London on a serious matter: Ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.

What's worse than murderer, that I may name it? No, no, my heart will burst, and if I speak: And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.

Nay, never bear me hence, dispatch me here, Here sheathe thy sword, I'll pardon thee my death: What, wilt thou not? then, Clarence, do it thou.

Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it? Ay, but thou usest to forswear thyself: 'Twas sin before, but now 'tis charity.

What, wilt thou not? Where is that devil's butcher, Hard-favour'd Richard? Richard, where art thou? Thou art not here: murder is thy alms-deed, Petitioners for blood thou ne'er put'st back.

So come to you and yours, as to this Prince! Where's Richard gone? To London, all in post, and, as I guess, To make a bloody supper in the Tower.

Now march we hence: discharge the common sort With pay and thanks, and let's away to London And see our gentle queen how well she fares: By this, I hope, she hath a son for me.

So flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf, So first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece And next his throat unto the butcher's knife.

What scene of death hath Roscius now to act? Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind, The thief doth fear each bush an officer.

Why, what a peevish fool was that of Crete, That taught his son the office of a fowl! An yet, for all his wings, the fool was drown'd.

Ah, kill me with thy weapon, not with words! My breast can better brook thy dagger's point Than can my ears that tragic history.

But wherefore dost thou come? is't for my life? Think'st thou I am an executioner? A persecutor, I am sure, thou art: If murdering innocents be executing, Why, then thou art an executioner.

Hadst thou been kill'd when first thou didst presume, Thou hadst not lived to kill a son of mine.

Thy mother felt more than a mother's pain, And, yet brought forth less than a mother's hope, To wit, an indigested and deformed lump, Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree.

God forgive my sins, and pardon thee! What, will the aspiring blood of Lancaster Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted.

Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so, Let hell make crook'd my mind to answer it.

I have no brother, I am like no brother, And this word 'love,' which graybeards call divine, Be resident in men like one another And not in me: I am myself alone.

King Henry and the prince his son are gone: Clarence, thy turn is next, and then the rest, Counting myself but bad till I be best.

I'll throw thy body in another room And triumph, Henry, in thy day of doom.

Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat And made our footstool of security.

This shoulder was ordain'd so thick to heave, And heave it shall some weight, or break my back: Work thou the way,--and thou shalt execute.

Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely queen, And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.

The duty that I owe unto your majesty I seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.

And, that I love the tree from whence thou sprang'st, Witness the loving kiss I give the fruit.

Now am I seated as my soul delights, Having my country's peace and brothers' loves.

What will your grace have done with Margaret? Reignier, her father, to the king of France Hath pawn'd the Sicils and Jerusalem, And hither have they sent it for her ransom.

In delivering my son from me, I bury a second husband.

And I in going, madam, weep o'er my father's death anew: but I must attend his majesty's command, to whom I am now in ward, evermore in subjection.

Would, for the king's sake, he were living! I think it would be the death of the king's disease.

How called you the man you speak of, madam? He was famous, sir, in his profession, and it was his great right to be so: Gerard de Narbon.

He was excellent indeed, madam: the king very lately spoke of him admiringly and mourningly: he was skilful enough to have lived still, if knowledge could be set up against mortality.

What is it, my good lord, the king languishes of? A fistula, my lord.

Was this gentlewoman the daughter of Gerard de Narbon? His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to my overlooking.

'Tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise in.

The remembrance of her father never approaches her heart but the tyranny of her sorrows takes all livelihood from her cheek.

No more of this, Helena, go to, no more, lest it be rather thought you affect a sorrow than have it.

Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead, excessive grief the enemy to the living.

If the living be enemy to the grief, the excess makes it soon mortal.

What heaven more will, That thee may furnish and my prayers pluck down, Fall on thy head! Farewell, my lord, 'Tis an unseason'd courtier, good my lord, Advise him.

He cannot want the best That shall attend his love.

your thoughts be servants to you! Be comfortable to my mother, your mistress, and make much of her.

Farewell, pretty lady: you must hold the credit of your father.

O, were that all! I think not on my father, And these great tears grace his remembrance more Than those I shed for him.

What was he like? I have forgot him: my imagination Carries no favour in't but Bertram's.

I am undone: there is no living, none, If Bertram be away.

'Twere all one That I should love a bright particular star And think to wed it, he is so above me: In his bright radiance and collateral light Must I be comforted, not in his sphere.

The ambition in my love thus plagues itself: The hind that would be mated by the lion Must die for love.

You have some stain of soldier in you: let me ask you a question.

Man is enemy to virginity, how may we barricado it against him? Keep him out.

But he assails, and our virginity, though valiant, in the defence yet is weak: unfold to us some warlike resistance.

There is none: man, sitting down before you, will undermine you and blow you up.

It is not politic in the commonwealth of nature to preserve virginity.

Loss of virginity is rational increase and there was never virgin got till virginity was first lost.

Virginity by being once lost may be ten times found, by being ever kept, it is ever lost: 'tis too cold a companion, away with 't! I will stand for 't a little, though therefore I die a virgin.

There's little can be said in 't, 'tis against the rule of nature.

To speak on the part of virginity, is to accuse your mothers, which is most infallible disobedience.

He that hangs himself is a virgin: virginity murders itself and should be buried in highways out of all sanctified limit, as a desperate offendress against nature.

Virginity breeds mites, much like a cheese, consumes itself to the very paring, and so dies with feeding his own stomach.

Besides, virginity is peevish, proud, idle, made of self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in the canon.

'Tis a commodity will lose the gloss with lying, the longer kept, the less worth: off with 't while 'tis vendible, answer the time of request.

Virginity, like an old courtier, wears her cap out of fashion: richly suited, but unsuitable: just like the brooch and the tooth-pick, which wear not now.

God send him well! The court's a learning place, and he is one-- What one, i' faith? That I wish well.

Little Helen, farewell, if I can remember thee, I will think of thee at court.

Monsieur Parolles, you were born under a charitable star.

Why under Mars? The wars have so kept you under that you must needs be born under Mars.

Why think you so? You go so much backward when you fight.

So is running away, when fear proposes the safety, but the composition that your valour and fear makes in you is a virtue of a good wing, and I like the wear well.

I am so full of businesses, I cannot answer thee acutely.

When thou hast leisure, say thy prayers, when thou hast none, remember thy friends, get thee a good husband, and use him as he uses thee, so, farewell.

Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie, Which we ascribe to heaven: the fated sky Gives us free scope, only doth backward pull Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull.

What power is it which mounts my love so high, That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye? The mightiest space in fortune nature brings To join like likes and kiss like native things.

Enter the KING of France, with letters, and divers Attendants The Florentines and Senoys are by the ears, Have fought with equal fortune and continue A braving war.

His love and wisdom, Approved so to your majesty, may plead For amplest credence.

He hath arm'd our answer, And Florence is denied before he comes: Yet, for our gentlemen that mean to see The Tuscan service, freely have they leave To stand on either part.

It well may serve A nursery to our gentry, who are sick For breathing and exploit.

What's he comes here? It is the Count Rousillon, my good lord, Young Bertram.

Youth, thou bear'st thy father's face, Frank nature, rather curious than in haste, Hath well composed thee.

Thy father's moral parts Mayst thou inherit too! Welcome to Paris.

Such a man Might be a copy to these younger times, Which, follow'd well, would demonstrate them now But goers backward.

His good remembrance, sir, Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb, So in approof lives not his epitaph As in your royal speech.

This he wish'd, I after him do after him wish too, Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home, I quickly were dissolved from my hive, To give some labourers room.

You are loved, sir: They that least lend it you shall lack you first.

How long is't, count, Since the physician at your father's died? He was much famed.

Lend me an arm, the rest have worn me out With several applications, nature and sickness Debate it at their leisure.

'Tis not unknown to you, madam, I am a poor fellow.

No, madam, 'tis not so well that I am poor, though many of the rich are damned: but, if I may have your ladyship's good will to go to the world, Isbel the woman and I will do as we may.

Wilt thou needs be a beggar? I do beg your good will in this case.

Service is no heritage: and I think I shall never have the blessing of God till I have issue o' my body, for they say barnes are blessings.

My poor body, madam, requires it: I am driven on by the flesh, and he must needs go that the devil drives.

I am out o' friends, madam, and I hope to have friends for my wife's sake.

You're shallow, madam, in great friends, for the knaves come to do that for me which I am aweary of.

May it please you, madam, that he bid Helen come to you: of her I am to speak.

Sirrah, tell my gentlewoman I would speak with her, Helen, I mean.

What, one good in ten? you corrupt the song, sirrah.

One good woman in ten, madam, which is a purifying o' the song: would God would serve the world so all the year! we'ld find no fault with the tithe-woman, if I were the parson.

That man should be at woman's command, and yet no hurt done! Though honesty be no puritan, yet it will do no hurt, it will wear the surplice of humility over the black gown of a big heart.

I am going, forsooth: the business is for Helen to come hither.

I know, madam, you love your gentlewoman entirely.

You have discharged this honestly, keep it to yourself: many likelihoods informed me of this before, which hung so tottering in the balance that I could neither believe nor misdoubt.

Pray you, leave me: stall this in your bosom, and I thank you for your honest care: I will speak with you further anon.

What is your pleasure, madam? You know, Helen, I am a mother to you.

Can't no other, But, I your daughter, he must be my brother? Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law: God shield you mean it not! daughter and mother So strive upon your pulse.

Speak, is't so? If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew, If it be not, forswear't: howe'er, I charge thee, As heaven shall work in me for thine avail, Tell me truly.

Then, I confess, Here on my knee, before high heaven and you, That before you, and next unto high heaven, I love your son.

My lord your son made me to think of this, Else Paris and the medicine and the king Had from the conversation of my thoughts Haply been absent then.

'Tis our hope, sir, After well enter'd soldiers, to return And find your grace in health.

No, no, it cannot be, and yet my heart Will not confess he owes the malady That doth my life besiege.

Health, at your bidding, serve your majesty! Those girls of Italy, take heed of them: They say, our French lack language to deny, If they demand: beware of being captives, Before you serve.

Come hither to me. O, my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us! 'Tis not his fault, the spark.

O, 'tis brave wars! Most admirable: I have seen those wars.

I am commanded here, and kept a coil with 'Too young' and 'the next year' and ''tis too early.

I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock, Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry, Till honour be bought up and no sword worn But one to dance with! By heaven, I'll steal away.

I grow to you, and our parting is a tortured body.

Sweet Monsieur Parolles! Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin.

Mars dote on you for his novices! what will ye do? Stay: the king.

Worthy fellows, and like to prove most sinewy sword-men.

Then here's a man stands, that has brought his pardon.

I would you had kneel'd, my lord, to ask me mercy, And that at my bidding you could so stand up.

I would I had, so I had broke thy pate, And ask'd thee mercy for't.

Now, good Lafeu, Bring in the admiration, that we with thee May spend our wonder too, or take off thine By wondering how thou took'st it.

Now, fair one, does your business follow us? Ay, my good lord.

Gerard de Narbon was my father, In what he did profess, well found.

The rather will I spare my praises towards him: Knowing him is enough.

On's bed of death Many receipts he gave me: chiefly one.

My duty then shall pay me for my pains: I will no more enforce mine office on you.

Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts A modest one, to bear me back again.

What I can do can do no hurt to try, Since you set up your rest 'gainst remedy.

Oft expectation fails and most oft there Where most it promises, and oft it hits Where hope is coldest and despair most fits.

I must not hear thee, fare thee well, kind maid, Thy pains not used must by thyself be paid: Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.

Dear sir, to my endeavours give consent, Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.

I am not an impostor that proclaim Myself against the level of mine aim, But know I think and think I know most sure My art is not past power nor you past cure.

Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak His powerful sound within an organ weak: And what impossibility would slay In common sense, sense saves another way.

Sweet practiser, thy physic I will try, That ministers thine own death if I die.

If I break time, or flinch in property Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die, And well deserved: not helping, death's my fee, But, if I help, what do you promise me? Make thy demand.

But will you make it even? Ay, by my sceptre and my hopes of heaven.

Here is my hand, the premises observed, Thy will by my performance shall be served: So make the choice of thy own time, for I, Thy resolved patient, on thee still rely.

More should I question thee, and more I must, Though more to know could not be more to trust, From whence thou camest, how tended on: but rest Unquestion'd welcome and undoubted blest.

Give me some help here, ho! If thou proceed As high as word, my deed shall match thy meed.

Exeunt Come on, sir, I shall now put you to the height of your breeding.

I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught: I know my business is but to the court.

Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness for all From below your duke to beneath your constable, it will fit any question.

It must be an answer of most monstrous size that must fit all demands.

But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned should speak truth of it: here it is, and all that belongs to't.

Ask me if I am a courtier: it shall do you no harm to learn.

To be young again, if we could: I will be a fool in question, hoping to be the wiser by your answer.

I pray you, sir, are you a courtier? O Lord, sir! There's a simple putting off.

I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.

Do you cry, 'O Lord, sir!' at your whipping, and 'spare not me?' Indeed your 'O Lord, sir!' is very sequent to your whipping: you would answer very well to a whipping, if you were but bound to't.

I ne'er had worse luck in my life in my 'O Lord, sir!' I see things may serve long, but not serve ever.

I play the noble housewife with the time To entertain't so merrily with a fool.

Give Helen this, And urge her to a present answer back: Commend me to my kinsmen and my son: This is not much.

Not much employment for you: you understand me? Most fruitfully: I am there before my legs.

They say miracles are past, and we have our philosophical persons, to make modern and familiar, things supernatural and causeless.

Hence is it that we make trifles of terrors, ensconcing ourselves into seeming knowledge, when we should submit ourselves to an unknown fear.

Why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath shot out in our latter times.

Of all the learned and authentic fellows,-- Right, so I say.

That gave him out incurable,-- Why, there 'tis, so say I too.

Not to be helped,-- Right, as 'twere, a man assured of a-- Uncertain life, and sure death.

It is, indeed: if you will have it in showing, you shall read it in--what do you call there? A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly actor.

In a most weak-- and debile minister, great power, great transcendence: which should, indeed, give us a further use to be made than alone the recovery of the king, as to be-- generally thankful.

Here comes the king. Lustig, as the Dutchman says: I'll like a maid the better, whilst I have a tooth in my head: why, he's able to lead her a coranto.

Mort du vinaigre! is not this Helen? 'Fore God, I think so.

Peruse them well: Not one of those but had a noble father.

Heaven hath through me restored the king to health.

I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest, That I protest I simply am a maid.

Make choice, and, see, Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.

Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly, And to imperial Love, that god most high, Do my sighs stream.

I had rather be in this choice than throw ames-ace for my life.

The honour, sir, that flames in your fair eyes, Before I speak, too threateningly replies: Love make your fortunes twenty times above Her that so wishes and her humble love! No better, if you please.

My wish receive, Which great Love grant! and so, I take my leave.

Do all they deny her? An they were sons of mine, I'd have them whipped, or I would send them to the Turk, to make eunuchs of.

You are too young, too happy, and too good, To make yourself a son out of my blood.

There's one grape yet, I am sure thy father drunk wine: but if thou be'st not an ass, I am a youth of fourteen, I have known thee already.

Me and my service, ever whilst I live, Into your guiding power.

This is the man. Why, then, young Bertram, take her, she's thy wife.

My wife, my liege! I shall beseech your highness, In such a business give me leave to use The help of mine own eyes.

Know'st thou not, Bertram, What she has done for me? Yes, my good lord, But never hope to know why I should marry her.

Thou know'st she has raised me from my sickly bed.

But follows it, my lord, to bring me down Must answer for your raising? I know her well: She had her breeding at my father's charge.

A poor physician's daughter my wife! Disdain Rather corrupt me ever! 'Tis only title thou disdain'st in her, the which I can build up.

Strange is it that our bloods, Of colour, weight, and heat, pour'd all together, Would quite confound distinction, yet stand off In differences so mighty.

Vileness is so: The property by what it is should go, Not by the title.

What should be said? If thou canst like this creature as a maid, I can create the rest: virtue and she Is her own dower, honour and wealth from me.

Thou wrong'st thyself, if thou shouldst strive to choose.

That you are well restored, my lord, I'm glad: Let the rest go.

My honour's at the stake, which to defeat, I must produce my power.

Take her by the hand, And tell her she is thine: to whom I promise A counterpoise, if not to thy estate A balance more replete.

As thou lovest her, Thy love's to me religious, else, does err.

Your pleasure, sir? Your lord and master did well to make his Recantation! My lord! my master! Ay, is it not a language I speak? A most harsh one, and not to be understood without bloody succeeding.

My master! Are you companion to the Count Rousillon? To any count, to all counts, to what is man.

To what is count's man: count's master is of another style.

You are too old, sir, let it satisfy you, you are too old.

I must tell thee, sirrah, I write man, to which title age cannot bring thee.

I have now found thee, when I lose thee again, I care not: yet art thou good for nothing but taking up, and that thou't scarce worth.

Give me thy hand. My lord, you give me most egregious indignity.

Yes, good faith, every dram of it, and I will not bate thee a scruple.

Even as soon as thou canst, for thou hast to pull at a smack o' the contrary.

If ever thou be'st bound in thy scarf and beaten, thou shalt find what it is to be proud of thy bondage.

I have a desire to hold my acquaintance with thee, or rather my knowledge, that I may say in the default, he is a man I know.

I would it were hell-pains for thy sake, and my poor doing eternal: for doing I am past: as I will by thee, in what motion age will give me leave.

Well, thou hast a son shall take this disgrace off me, scurvy, old, filthy, scurvy lord! Well, I must be patient, there is no fettering of authority.

I'll beat him, by my life, if I can meet him with any convenience, an he were double and double a lord.

I'll have no more pity of his age than I would of--I'll beat him, an if I could but meet him again.

Re-enter LAFEU Sirrah, your lord and master's married, there's news for you: you have a new mistress.

I most unfeignedly beseech your lordship to make some reservation of your wrongs: he is my good lord: whom I serve above is my master.

Why dost thou garter up thy arms o' this fashion? dost make hose of sleeves? do other servants so? Thou wert best set thy lower part where thy nose stands.

You are not worth another word, else I'ld call you knave.

I leave you. Good, very good, it is so then: good, very good, let it be concealed awhile.

Re-enter BERTRAM Undone, and forfeited to cares for ever! What's the matter, sweet-heart? Although before the solemn priest I have sworn, I will not bed her.

What, what, sweet-heart? O my Parolles, they have married me! I'll to the Tuscan wars, and never bed her.

France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits The tread of a man's foot: to the wars! There's letters from my mother: what the import is, I know not yet.

Will this capriccio hold in thee? art sure? Go with me to my chamber, and advise me.

I'll send her straight away: to-morrow I'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.

'Tis hard: A young man married is a man that's marr'd: Therefore away, and leave her bravely, go: The king has done you wrong: but, hush, 'tis so.

If she be very well, what does she ail, that she's not very well? Truly, she's very well indeed, but for two things.

You had my prayers to lead them on, and to keep them on, have them still.

O, my knave, how does my old lady? So that you had her wrinkles and I her money, I would she did as you say.

You should have said, sir, before a knave thou'rt a knave, that's, before me thou'rt a knave: this had been truth, sir.

Did you find me in yourself, sir? or were you taught to find me? The search, sir, was profitable, and much fool may you find in you, even to the world's pleasure and the increase of laughter.

Madam, my lord will go away to-night, A very serious business calls on him.

What's his will else? That you will take your instant leave o' the king And make this haste as your own good proceeding, Strengthen'd with what apology you think May make it probable need.

What more commands he? That, having this obtain'd, you presently Attend his further pleasure.

But I hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier.

Then my dial goes not true: I took this lark for a bunting.

I do assure you, my lord, he is very great in knowledge and accordingly valiant.

I have then sinned against his experience and transgressed against his valour, and my state that way is dangerous, since I cannot yet find in my heart to repent.

Here he comes: I pray you, make us friends, I will pursue the amity.

Pray you, sir, who's his tailor? O, I know him well, I, sir, he, sir, 's a good workman, a very good tailor.

I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure, Given order for our horses, and to-night, When I should take possession of the bride, End ere I do begin.

A good traveller is something at the latter end of a dinner, but one that lies three thirds and uses a known truth to pass a thousand nothings with, should be once heard and thrice beaten.

And shall do so ever, though I took him at 's prayers.

Fare you well, my lord, and believe this of me, there can be no kernel in this light nut, the soul of this man is his clothes.

Trust him not in matter of heavy consequence, I have kept of them tame, and know their natures.

Farewell, monsieur: I have spoken better of you than you have or will to deserve at my hand, but we must do good against evil.

Why, do you not know him? Yes, I do know him well, and common speech Gives him a worthy pass.

Here comes my clog. I have, sir, as I was commanded from you, Spoke with the king and have procured his leave For present parting, only he desires Some private speech with you.

You must not marvel, Helen, at my course, Which holds not colour with the time, nor does The ministration and required office On my particular.

This to my mother: Giving a letter 'Twill be two days ere I shall see you, so I leave you to your wisdom.

Sir, I can nothing say, But that I am your most obedient servant.

And ever shall With true observance seek to eke out that Wherein toward me my homely stars have fail'd To equal my great fortune.

Let that go: My haste is very great: farewell, hie home.

Well, what would you say? I am not worthy of the wealth I owe, Nor dare I say 'tis mine, and yet it is, But, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal What law does vouch mine own.

What would you have? Something, and scarce so much: nothing, indeed.

I would not tell you what I would, my lord: Faith yes, Strangers and foes do sunder, and not kiss.

Go thou toward home, where I will never come Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum.

Holy seems the quarrel Upon your grace's part, black and fearful On the opposer.

Therefore we marvel much our cousin France Would in so just a business shut his bosom Against our borrowing prayers.

But I am sure the younger of our nature, That surfeit on their ease, will day by day Come here for physic.

Welcome shall they be, And all the honours that can fly from us Shall on them settle.

You know your places well, When better fall, for your avails they fell: To-morrow to the field.

Exeunt It hath happened all as I would have had it, save that he comes not along with her.

By my troth, I take my young lord to be a very melancholy man.

By what observance, I pray you? Why, he will look upon his boot and sing, mend the ruff and sing, ask questions and sing, pick his teeth and sing.

I know a man that had this trick of melancholy sold a goodly manor for a song.

Let me see what he writes, and when he means to come.

I have wedded her, not bedded her, and sworn to make the 'not' eternal.

You shall hear I am run away: know it before the report come.

If there be breadth enough in the world, I will hold a long distance.

Your unfortunate son, This is not well, rash and unbridled boy.

To fly the favours of so good a king, To pluck his indignation on thy head By the misprising of a maid too virtuous For the contempt of empire.

Why should he be killed? So say I, madam, if he run away, as I hear he does: the danger is in standing to't, that's the loss of men, though it be the getting of children.

Here they come will tell you more: for my part, I only hear your son was run away.

When thou canst get the ring upon my finger which never shall come off, and show me a child begotten of thy body that I am father to, then call me husband: but in such a 'then' I write a 'never.

Brought you this letter, gentlemen? Ay, madam, And for the contents' sake are sorry for our pain.

I prithee, lady, have a better cheer, If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine, Thou robb'st me of a moiety: he was my son, But I do wash his name out of my blood, And thou art all my child.

And to be a soldier? Such is his noble purpose, and believe 't, The duke will lay upon him all the honour That good convenience claims.

Return you thither? Ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.

'Tis but the boldness of his hand, haply, which his heart was not consenting to.

Nothing in France, until he have no wife! There's nothing here that is too good for him But only she, and she deserves a lord That twenty such rude boys might tend upon And call her hourly mistress.

Who was with him? A servant only, and a gentleman Which I have sometime known.

My son corrupts a well-derived nature With his inducement.

Indeed, good lady, The fellow has a deal of that too much, Which holds him much to have.

I will entreat you, when you see my son, To tell him that his sword can never win The honour that he loses: more I'll entreat you Written to bear along.

We serve you, madam, In that and all your worthiest affairs.

Will you draw near! 'Till I have no wife, I have nothing in France.

Nothing in France, until he has no wife! Thou shalt have none, Rousillon, none in France, Then hast thou all again.

Come, night, end, day! For with the dark, poor thief, I'll steal away.

Enter the DUKE of Florence, BERTRAM, PAROLLES, Soldiers, Drum, and Trumpets The general of our horse thou art, and we, Great in our hope, lay our best love and credence Upon thy promising fortune.

Sir, it is A charge too heavy for my strength, but yet We'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake To the extreme edge of hazard.

Alas! and would you take the letter of her? Might you not know she would do as she has done, By sending me a letter? Read it again.

I am Saint Jaques' pilgrim, thither gone: Ambitious love hath so in me offended, That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon, With sainted vow my faults to have amended.

Pardon me, madam: If I had given you this at over-night, She might have been o'erta'en, and yet she writes, Pursuit would be but vain.

What angel shall Bless this unworthy husband? he cannot thrive, Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath Of greatest justice.

Write, write, Rinaldo, To this unworthy husband of his wife, Let every word weigh heavy of her worth That he does weigh too light: my greatest grief.

I have no skill in sense To make distinction: provide this messenger: My heart is heavy and mine age is weak, Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.

Nay, come, for if they do approach the city, we shall lose all the sight.

They say the French count has done most honourable service.

It is reported that he has taken their greatest commander, and that with his own hand he slew the duke's brother.

We have lost our labour, they are gone a contrary way: hark! you may know by their trumpets.

Come, let's return again, and suffice ourselves with the report of it.

Well, Diana, take heed of this French earl: the honour of a maid is her name, and no legacy is so rich as honesty.

I have told my neighbour how you have been solicited by a gentleman his companion.

I know that knave, hang him! one Parolles: a filthy officer he is in those suggestions for the young earl.

I hope I need not to advise you further, but I hope your own grace will keep you where you are, though there were no further danger known but the modesty which is so lost.

Look, here comes a pilgrim: I know she will lie at my house, thither they send one another: I'll question her.

God save you, pilgrim! whither are you bound? To Saint Jaques le Grand.

Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you? At the Saint Francis here beside the port.

If you will tarry, holy pilgrim, But till the troops come by, I will conduct you where you shall be lodged, The rather, for I think I know your hostess As ample as myself.

Here you shall see a countryman of yours That has done worthy service.

The Count Rousillon: know you such a one? But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him: His face I know not.

He stole from France, As 'tis reported, for the king had married him Against his liking: think you it is so? Ay, surely, mere the truth: I know his lady.

There is a gentleman that serves the count Reports but coarsely of her.

Alas, poor lady! 'Tis a hard bondage to become the wife Of a detesting lord.

I warrant, good creature, wheresoe'er she is, Her heart weighs sadly: this young maid might do her A shrewd turn, if she pleased.

How do you mean? May be the amorous count solicits her In the unlawful purpose.

He does indeed, And brokes with all that can in such a suit Corrupt the tender honour of a maid: But she is arm'd for him and keeps her guard In honestest defence.

The gods forbid else! So, now they come: Drum and Colours That is Antonio, the duke's eldest son, That, Escalus.

Which is the Frenchman? That with the plume: 'tis a most gallant fellow.

I would he loved his wife: if he were honester He were much goodlier: is't not a handsome gentleman? I like him well.

'Tis pity he is not honest: yond's that same knave That leads him to these places: were I his lady, I would Poison that vile rascal.

Which is he? That jack-an-apes with scarfs: why is he melancholy? Perchance he's hurt i' the battle.

He's shrewdly vexed at something: look, he has spied us.

Marry, hang you! And your courtesy, for a ring-carrier! The troop is past.

Come, pilgrim, I will bring you Where you shall host: of enjoin'd penitents There's four or five, to great Saint Jaques bound, Already at my house.

Nay, good my lord, put him to't, let him have his If your lordship find him not a hilding, hold me no more in your respect.

I would I knew in what particular action to try him.

None better than to let him fetch off his drum, which you hear him so confidently undertake to do.

hinder not the honour of his design: let him fetch off his drum in any hand.

How now, monsieur! this drum sticks sorely in your A pox on't, let it go, 'tis but a drum.

Well, we cannot greatly condemn our success: some dishonour we had in the loss of that drum, but it is not to be recovered.

It is to be recovered: but that the merit of service is seldom attributed to the true and exact performer, I would have that drum or another, or 'hic jacet.

and extend to you what further becomes his greatness, even to the utmost syllable of your By the hand of a soldier, I will undertake it.

I'll about it this evening: and I will presently pen down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my certainty, put myself into my mortal preparation, and by midnight look to hear further from me.

May I be bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about it? I know not what the success will be, my lord, but the attempt I vow.

I know thou'rt valiant, and, to the possibility of thy soldiership, will subscribe for thee.

We'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case him.

He was first smoked by the old lord Lafeu: when his disguise and he is parted, tell me what a sprat you shall find him, which you shall see this very night.

Now will I lead you to the house, and show you The lass I spoke of.

She's a fair creature: Will you go see her? With all my heart, my lord.

If you misdoubt me that I am not she, I know not how I shall assure you further, But I shall lose the grounds I work upon.

Though my estate be fallen, I was well born, Nothing acquainted with these businesses, And would not put my reputation now In any staining act.

I should believe you: For you have show'd me that which well approves You're great in fortune.

Take this purse of gold, And let me buy your friendly help thus far, Which I will over-pay and pay again When I have found it.

The count he wooes your daughter, Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty, Resolved to carry her: let her in fine consent, As we'll direct her how 'tis best to bear it.

I have yielded: Instruct my daughter how she shall persever, That time and place with this deceit so lawful May prove coherent.

Every night he comes With musics of all sorts and songs composed To her unworthiness: it nothing steads us To chide him from our eaves, for he persists As if his life lay on't.

Why then to-night Let us assay our plot, which, if it speed, Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed And lawful meaning in a lawful act, Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact: But let's about it.

He can come no other way but by this hedge-corner.

Art not acquainted with him? knows he not thy voice? No, sir, I warrant you.

But what linsey-woolsey hast thou to speak to us again? E'en such as you speak to me.

He must think us some band of strangers i' the adversary's entertainment.

As for you, interpreter, you must seem very politic.

But couch, ho! here he comes, to beguile two hours in a sleep, and then to return and swear the lies he forges.

Ten o'clock: within these three hours 'twill be time enough to go home.

What shall I say I have done? It must be a very plausive invention that carries it: they begin to smoke me, and disgraces have of late knocked too often at my door.

I find my tongue is too foolhardy, but my heart hath the fear of Mars before it and of his creatures, not daring the reports of my tongue.

This is the first truth that e'er thine own tongue was guilty of.

Wherefore, what's the instance? Tongue, I must put you into a butter-woman's mouth and buy myself another of Bajazet's mule, if you prattle me into these perils.

Is it possible he should know what he is, and be that he is? I would the cutting of my garments would serve the turn, or the breaking of my Spanish sword.

Or the baring of my beard, and to say it was in 'Twould not do.

Though I swore I leaped from the window of the citadel.

Three great oaths would scarce make that be believed.

I would I had any drum of the enemy's: I would swear I recovered it.

A drum now of the enemy's,-- Alarum within Throca movousus, cargo, cargo, cargo.

They seize and blindfold him Boskos thromuldo boskos.

Boskos vauvado: I understand thee, and can speak thy tongue.

Kerely bonto, sir, betake thee to thy faith, for seventeen poniards are at thy bosom.

The general is content to spare thee yet, And, hoodwink'd as thou art, will lead thee on To gather from thee: haply thou mayst inform Something to save thy life.

O, let me live! And all the secrets of our camp I'll show, Their force, their purposes, nay, I'll speak that Which you will wonder at.

Go, tell the Count Rousillon, and my brother, We have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled Till we do hear from them.

A' will betray us all unto ourselves: Inform on that.

My mother did but duty, such, my lord, As you owe to your wife.

No more o' that, I prithee, do not strive against my vows: I was compell'd to her, but I love thee By love's own sweet constraint, and will for ever Do thee all rights of service.

Ay, so you serve us Till we serve you, but when you have our roses, You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves And mock us with our bareness.

How have I sworn! 'Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth, But the plain single vow that is vow'd true.

Change it, change it, Be not so holy-cruel: love is holy, And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts That you do charge men with.

Stand no more off, But give thyself unto my sick desires, Who then recover: say thou art mine, and ever My love as it begins shall so persever.

I see that men make ropes in such a scarre That we'll forsake ourselves.

Give me that ring. I'll lend it thee, my dear, but have no power To give it from me.

Will you not, my lord? It is an honour 'longing to our house, Bequeathed down from many ancestors, Which were the greatest obloquy i' the world In me to lose.

Here, take my ring: My house, mine honour, yea, my life, be thine, And I'll be bid by thee.

When midnight comes, knock at my chamber-window: I'll order take my mother shall not hear.

You have won A wife of me, though there my hope be done.

For which live long to thank both heaven and me! You may so in the end.

My mother told me just how he would woo, As if she sat in 's heart, she says all men Have the like oaths: he had sworn to marry me When his wife's dead, therefore I'll lie with him When I am buried.

Since Frenchmen are so braid, Marry that will, I live and die a maid: Only in this disguise I think't no sin To cozen him that would unjustly win.

You have not given him his mother's letter? I have delivered it an hour since: there is something in't that stings his nature, for on the reading it he changed almost into another man.

He has much worthy blame laid upon him for shaking off so good a wife and so sweet a lady.

Especially he hath incurred the everlasting displeasure of the king, who had even tuned his bounty to sing happiness to him.

I will tell you a thing, but you shall let it dwell darkly with you.

When you have spoken it, 'tis dead, and I am the grave of it.

Now, God delay our rebellion! as we are ourselves, what things are we! Merely our own traitors.

Is it not meant damnable in us, to be trumpeters of our unlawful intents? We shall not then have his company to-night? Not till after midnight, for he is dieted to his hour.

That approaches apace, I would gladly have him see his company anatomized, that he might take a measure of his own judgments, wherein so curiously he had set this counterfeit.

We will not meddle with him till he come, for his presence must be the whip of the other.

In the mean time, what hear you of these wars? I hear there is an overture of peace.

What will Count Rousillon do then? will he travel higher, or return again into France? I perceive, by this demand, you are not altogether of his council.

Let it be forbid, sir, so should I be a great deal of his act.

Hath the count all this intelligence? Ay, and the particular confirmations, point from point, so to the full arming of the verity.

The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good and ill together: our virtues would be proud, if our faults whipped them not, and our crimes would despair, if they were not cherished by our virtues.

How now! where's your master? He met the duke in the street, sir, of whom he hath taken a solemn leave: his lordship will next morning for France.

The duke hath offered him letters of commendations to the king.

They shall be no more than needful there, if they were more than they can commend.

If the business be of any difficulty, and this morning your departure hence, it requires haste of your lordship.

I mean, the business is not ended, as fearing to hear of it hereafter.

But shall we have this dialogue between the fool and the soldier? Come, bring forth this counterfeit module, he has deceived me, like a double-meaning prophesier.

Bring him forth: has sat i' the stocks all night, poor gallant knave.

No matter: his heels have deserved it, in usurping his spurs so long.

How does he carry himself? I have told your lordship already, the stocks carry him.

Our general bids you answer to what I shall ask you out of a note.

What say you to that? Five or six thousand, but very weak and unserviceable: the troops are all scattered, and the commanders very poor rogues, upon my reputation and credit and as I hope to live.

Shall I set down your answer so? Do: I'll take the sacrament on't, how and which way you will.

I will never trust a man again for keeping his sword clean.

nor believe he can have every thing in him by wearing his apparel neatly.

Five or six thousand horse, I said,-- I will say true,--or thereabouts, set down, for I'll speak truth.

But I con him no thanks for't, in the nature he delivers it.

I humbly thank you, sir: a truth's a truth, the rogues are marvellous poor.

What say you to that? By my troth, sir, if I were to live this present hour, I will tell true.

What shall be done to him? Nothing, but let him have thanks.

Demand of him my condition, and what credit I have with the duke.

What say you to this? what do you know of it? I beseech you, let me answer to the particular of the inter'gatories: demand them singly.

Do you know this Captain Dumain? I know him: a' was a botcher's 'prentice in Paris, from whence he was whipped for getting the shrieve's fool with child,--a dumb innocent, that could not say him nay.

Nay, by your leave, hold your hands, though I know his brains are forfeit to the next tile that falls.

Well, is this captain in the duke of Florence's camp? Upon my knowledge, he is, and lousy.

Nay look not so upon me, we shall hear of your lordship anon.

What is his reputation with the duke? The duke knows him for no other but a poor officer of mine, and writ to me this other day to turn him out o' the band: I think I have his letter in my pocket.

In good sadness, I do not know, either it is there, or it is upon a file with the duke's other letters in my tent.

Here 'tis, here's a paper: shall I read it to you? I do not know if it be it or no.

My meaning in't, I protest, was very honest in the behalf of the maid, for I knew the young count to be a dangerous and lascivious boy, who is a whale to virginity and devours up all the fry it finds.

Thine, as he vowed to thee in thine ear, He shall be whipped through the army with this rhyme in's forehead.

This is your devoted friend, sir, the manifold linguist and the armipotent soldier.

I could endure any thing before but a cat, and now he's a cat to me.

I perceive, sir, by the general's looks, we shall be fain to hang you.

I have but little more to say, sir, of his honesty: he has every thing that an honest man should not have, what an honest man should have, he has nothing.

For this description of thine honesty? A pox upon him for me, he's more and more a cat.

He hath out-villained villany so far, that the rarity redeems him.

His qualities being at this poor price, I need not to ask you if gold will corrupt him to revolt.

Sir, for a quart d'ecu he will sell the fee-simple of his salvation, the inheritance of it, and cut the entail from all remainders, and a perpetual succession for it perpetually.

If your life be saved, will you undertake to betray the Florentine? Ay, and the captain of his horse, Count Rousillon.

I'll whisper with the general, and know his pleasure.

drums! Only to seem to deserve well, and to beguile the supposition of that lascivious young boy the count, have I run into this danger.

Come, headsman, off with his head. O Lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my death! That shall you, and take your leave of all your friends.

Unblinding him So, look about you: know you any here? Good morrow, noble captain.

Captain, what greeting will you to my Lord Lafeu? I am for France.

Good captain, will you give me a copy of the sonnet you writ to Diana in behalf of the Count Rousillon? an I were not a very coward, I'ld compel it of you: but fare you well.

Fare ye well, sir, I am for France too: we shall speak of you there.

Yet am I thankful: if my heart were great, 'Twould burst at this.

Captain I'll be no more, But I will eat and drink, and sleep as soft As captain shall: simply the thing I am Shall make me live.

Who knows himself a braggart, Let him fear this, for it will come to pass that every braggart shall be found an ass.

Rust, sword? cool, blushes! and, Parolles, live Safest in shame! being fool'd, by foolery thrive! There's place and means for every man alive.

You must know I am supposed dead: the army breaking, My husband hies him home, where, heaven aiding, And by the leave of my good lord the king, We'll be before our welcome.

Gentle madam, You never had a servant to whose trust Your business was more welcome.

But, O strange men! That can such sweet use make of what they hate, When saucy trusting of the cozen'd thoughts Defiles the pitchy night: so lust doth play With what it loathes for that which is away.

You, Diana, Under my poor instructions yet must suffer Something in my behalf.

Let death and honesty Go with your impositions, I am yours Upon your will to suffer.

Yet, I pray you: But with the word the time will bring on summer, When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns, And be as sweet as sharp.

We must away, Our wagon is prepared, and time revives us: All's well that ends well, still the fine's the crown, Whate'er the course, the end is the renown.

I would I had not known him, it was the death of the most virtuous gentlewoman that ever nature had praise for creating.

If she had partaken of my flesh, and cost me the dearest groans of a mother, I could not have owed her a more rooted love.

'Twas a good lady, 'twas a good lady: we may pick a thousand salads ere we light on such another herb.

Indeed, sir, she was the sweet marjoram of the salad, or rather, the herb of grace.

They are not herbs, you knave, they are nose-herbs.

I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir, I have not much skill in grass.

Whether dost thou profess thyself, a knave or a fool? A fool, sir, at a woman's service, and a knave at a man's.

Your distinction? I would cozen the man of his wife and do his service.

And I would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do her service.

I will subscribe for thee, thou art both knave and fool.

Why, sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve as great a prince as you are.

Who's that? a Frenchman? Faith, sir, a' has an English name, but his fisnomy is more hotter in France than there.

What prince is that? The black prince, sir, alias, the prince of darkness, alias, the devil.

Hold thee, there's my purse: I give thee not this to suggest thee from thy master thou talkest of, serve him still.

I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a great fire, and the master I speak of ever keeps a good fire.

But, sure, he is the prince of the world, let his nobility remain in's court.

Go thy ways, I begin to be aweary of thee, and I tell thee so before, because I would not fall out with thee.

Go thy ways: let my horses be well looked to, without any tricks.

If I put any tricks upon 'em, sir, they shall be jades' tricks, which are their own right by the law of nature.

My lord that's gone made himself much sport out of him: by his authority he remains here, which he thinks is a patent for his sauciness, and, indeed, he has no pace, but runs where he will.

How does your ladyship like it? With very much content, my lord, and I wish it happily effected.

His highness comes post from Marseilles, of as able body as when he numbered thirty: he will be here to-morrow, or I am deceived by him that in such intelligence hath seldom failed.

It rejoices me, that I hope I shall see him ere I die.

I have letters that my son will be here to-night: I shall beseech your lordship to remain with me till they meet together.

Madam, I was thinking with what manners I might safely be admitted.

Lady, of that I have made a bold charter, but I thank my God it holds yet.

A scar nobly got, or a noble scar, is a good livery of honour, so belike is that.

Let us go see your son, I pray you: I long to talk with the young noble soldier.

Faith there's a dozen of 'em, with delicate fine hats and most courteous feathers, which bow the head and nod at every man.

In happy time, This man may help me to his majesty's ear, If he would spend his power.

What's your will? That it will please you To give this poor petition to the king, And aid me with that store of power you have To come into his presence.

Not here, sir! Not, indeed: He hence removed last night and with more haste Than is his use.

Lord, how we lose our pains! ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL yet, Though time seem so adverse and means unfit.

I do beseech you, whither is he gone? Marry, as I take it, to Rousillon, Whither I am going.

I do beseech you, sir, Since you are like to see the king before me, Commend the paper to his gracious hand, Which I presume shall render you no blame But rather make you thank your pains for it.

I will come after you with what good speed Our means will make us means.

And you shall find yourself to be well thank'd, Whate'er falls more.

Nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir, I spake but by a metaphor.

Indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink, I will stop my nose, or against any man's metaphor.

Foh! prithee, stand away: a paper from fortune's close-stool to give to a nobleman! Look, here he comes himself.

I do pity his distress in my similes of comfort and leave him to your lordship.

My lord, I am a man whom fortune hath cruelly And what would you have me to do? 'Tis too late to pare her nails now.

You beg a single penny more: come, you shall ha't, save your word.

How does your drum? O my good lord, you were the first that found me! Was I, in sooth? and I was the first that lost thee.

It lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some grace, for you did bring me out.

Out upon thee, knave! dost thou put upon me at once both the office of God and the devil? One brings thee in grace and the other brings thee out.

Trumpets sound The king's coming, I know by his trumpets.

Sirrah, inquire further after me, I had talk of you last night: though you are a fool and a knave, you shall eat, go to, follow.

'Tis past, my liege, And I beseech your majesty to make it Natural rebellion, done i' the blaze of youth, When oil and fire, too strong for reason's force, O'erbears it and burns on.

My honour'd lady, I have forgiven and forgotten all, Though my revenges were high bent upon him, And watch'd the time to shoot.

This I must say, But first I beg my pardon, the young lord Did to his majesty, his mother and his lady Offence of mighty note, but to himself The greatest wrong of all.

He lost a wife Whose beauty did astonish the survey Of richest eyes, whose words all ears took captive, Whose dear perfection hearts that scorn'd to serve Humbly call'd mistress.

What says he to your daughter? have you spoke? All that he is hath reference to your highness.

I am not a day of season, For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail In me at once: but to the brightest beams Distracted clouds give way, so stand thou forth, The time is fair again.

My high-repented blames, Dear sovereign, pardon to me.

All is whole, Not one word more of the consumed time.

Let's take the instant by the forward top, For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees The inaudible and noiseless foot of Time Steals ere we can effect them.

Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin: The main consents are had, and here we'll stay To see our widower's second marriage-day.

BERTRAM gives a ring By my old beard, And every hair that's on't, Helen, that's dead, Was a sweet creature: such a ring as this, The last that e'er I took her at court, I saw upon her finger.

Now, pray you, let me see it, for mine eye, While I was speaking, oft was fasten'd to't.

This ring was mine, and, when I gave it Helen, I bade her, if her fortunes ever stood Necessitied to help, that by this token I would relieve her.

Had you that craft, to reave Of what should stead her most? My gracious sovereign, Howe'er it pleases you to take it so, The ring was never hers.

Son, on my life, I have seen her wear it, and she reckon'd it At her life's rate.

Plutus himself, That knows the tinct and multiplying medicine, Hath not in nature's mystery more science Than I have in this ring: 'twas mine, 'twas Helen's, Whoever gave it you.

Thou speak'st it falsely, as I love mine honour, And makest conjectural fears to come into me Which I would fain shut out.

Take him away. Guards seize BERTRAM My fore-past proofs, howe'er the matter fall, Shall tax my fears of little vanity, Having vainly fear'd too little.

If you shall prove This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence, Where yet she never was.

Gracious sovereign, Whether I have been to blame or no, I know not: Here's a petition from a Florentine, Who hath for four or five removes come short To tender it herself.

when his wife was dead, I blush to say it, he won me.

Now is the Count Rousillon a widower: his vows are forfeited to me, and my honour's paid to him.

He stole from Florence, taking no leave, and I follow him to his country for justice: grant it me, O king! in you it best lies, otherwise a seducer flourishes, and a poor maid is undone.

I will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll for this: I'll none of him.

The heavens have thought well on thee Lafeu, To bring forth this discovery.

Seek these suitors: Go speedily and bring again the count.

I am afeard the life of Helen, lady, Was foully snatch'd.

Now, justice on the doers! Re-enter BERTRAM, guarded I wonder, sir, sith wives are monsters to you, And that you fly them as you swear them lordship, Yet you desire to marry.

What woman's that? I am, my lord, a wretched Florentine, Derived from the ancient Capilet: My suit, as I do understand, you know, And therefore know how far I may be pitied.

I am her mother, sir, whose age and honour Both suffer under this complaint we bring, And both shall cease, without your remedy.

Your reputation comes too short for my daughter, you are no husband for her.

My lord, this is a fond and desperate creature, Whom sometime I have laugh'd with: let your highness Lay a more noble thought upon mine honour Than for to think that I would sink it here.

Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend Till your deeds gain them: fairer prove your honour Than in my thought it lies.

Good my lord, Ask him upon his oath, if he does think He had not my virginity.

What say'st thou to her? She's impudent, my lord, And was a common gamester to the camp.

He does me wrong, my lord, if I were so, He might have bought me at a common price: Do not believe him.

O, behold this ring, Whose high respect and rich validity Did lack a parallel, yet for all that He gave it to a commoner o' the camp, If I be one.

He blushes, and 'tis it: Of six preceding ancestors, that gem, Conferr'd by testament to the sequent issue, Hath it been owed and worn.

Methought you said You saw one here in court could witness it.

I did, my lord, but loath am to produce So bad an instrument: his name's Parolles.

What of him? He's quoted for a most perfidious slave, With all the spots o' the world tax'd and debosh'd, Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.

Am I or that or this for what he'll utter, That will speak any thing? She hath that ring of yours.

I must be patient: You, that have turn'd off a first so noble wife, May justly diet me.

I pray you yet, Since you lack virtue, I will lose a husband, Send for your ring, I will return it home, And give me mine again.

What ring was yours, I pray you? Sir, much like The same upon your finger.

The story then goes false, you threw it him Out of a casement.

Come, come, to the purpose: did he love this woman? Faith, sir, he did love her, but how? How, I pray you? He did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a woman.

How is that? He loved her, sir, and loved her not.

What an equivocal companion is this! I am a poor man, and at your majesty's command.

Do you know he promised me marriage? Faith, I know more than I'll speak.

But wilt thou not speak all thou knowest? Yes, so please your majesty.

Thou hast spoken all already, unless thou canst say they are married: but thou art too fine in thy evidence, therefore stand aside.

Where did you buy it? or who gave it you? It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.

If it were yours by none of all these ways, How could you give it him? I never gave it him.

This woman's an easy glove, my lord, she goes off and on at pleasure.

Take her away, I do not like her now, To prison with her: and away with him.

Unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst this ring, Thou diest within this hour.

Wherefore hast thou accused him all this while? Because he's guilty, and he is not guilty: He knows I am no maid, and he'll swear to't, I'll swear I am a maid, and he knows not.

Great king, I am no strumpet, by my life, I am either maid, or else this old man's wife.

Stay, royal sir: The jeweller that owes the ring is sent for, And he shall surety me.

Re-enter Widow, with HELENA Is there no exorcist Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes? Is't real that I see? No, my good lord, 'Tis but the shadow of a wife you see, The name and not the thing.

O, pardon! O my good lord, when I was like this maid, I found you wondrous kind.

There is your ring, And, look you, here's your letter, this it says: 'When from my finger you can get this ring And are by me with child,'  and c.

This is done: Will you be mine, now you are doubly won? If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly, I'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.

Let us from point to point this story know, To make the even truth in pleasure flow.

To DIANA If thou be'st yet a fresh uncropped flower, Choose thou thy husband, and I'll pay thy dower, For I can guess that by thy honest aid Thou keep'st a wife herself, thyself a maid.

Of that and all the progress, more or less, Resolvedly more leisure shall express: All yet seems well, and if it end so meet, The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.

As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashion bequeathed me by will but poor a thousand crowns, and, as thou sayest, charged my brother, on his blessing, to breed me well: and there begins my sadness.

Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he will shake me up.

Now, sir! what make you here? Nothing: I am not taught to make any thing.

What mar you then, sir? Marry, sir, I am helping you to mar that which God made, a poor unworthy brother of yours, with idleness.

Marry, sir, be better employed, and be naught awhile.

Shall I keep your hogs and eat husks with them? What prodigal portion have I spent, that I should come to such penury? Know you where your are, sir? O, sir, very well, here in your orchard.

Know you before whom, sir? Ay, better than him I am before knows me.

I know you are my eldest brother, and, in the gentle condition of blood, you should so know me.

What, boy! Come, come, elder brother, you are too young in this.

Wilt thou lay hands on me, villain? I am no villain, I am the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys, he was my father, and he is thrice a villain that says such a father begot villains.

Wert thou not my brother, I would not take this hand from thy throat till this other had pulled out thy tongue for saying so: thou hast railed on thyself.

Sweet masters, be patient: for your father's remembrance, be at accord.

My father charged you in his will to give me good education: you have trained me like a peasant, obscuring and hiding from me all gentleman-like qualities.

And what wilt thou do? beg, when that is spent? Well, sir, get you in: I will not long be troubled with you, you shall have some part of your will: I pray you, leave me.

I will no further offend you than becomes me for my good.

Is 'old dog' my reward? Most true, I have lost my teeth in your service.

God be with my old master! he would not have spoke such a word.

Is it even so? begin you to grow upon me? I will physic your rankness, and yet give no thousand crowns neither.

Holla, Dennis! Calls your worship? Was not Charles, the duke's wrestler, here to speak with me? So please you, he is here at the door and importunes access to you.

'Twill be a good way, and to-morrow the wrestling is.

She is at the court, and no less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter, and never two ladies loved as they do.

What, you wrestle to-morrow before the new duke? Marry, do I, sir, and I came to acquaint you with a matter.

I am given, sir, secretly to understand that your younger brother Orlando hath a disposition to come in disguised against me to try a fall.

To-morrow, sir, I wrestle for my credit, and he that escapes me without some broken limb shall acquit him well.

Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which thou shalt find I will most kindly requite.

I had myself notice of my brother's purpose herein and have by underhand means laboured to dissuade him from it, but he is resolute.

I speak but brotherly of him, but should I anatomize him to thee as he is, I must blush and weep and thou must look pale and wonder.

If he come to-morrow, I'll give him his payment: if ever he go alone again, I'll never wrestle for prize more: and so God keep your worship! Farewell, good Charles.

Now will I stir this gamester: I hope I shall see an end of him, for my soul, yet I know not why, hates nothing more than he.

Herein I see thou lovest me not with the full weight that I love thee.

Well, I will forget the condition of my estate, to rejoice in yours.

What shall be our sport, then? Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune from her wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally.

I would we could do so, for her benefits are mightily misplaced, and the bountiful blind woman doth most mistake in her gifts to women.

'Tis true, for those that she makes fair she scarce makes honest, and those that she makes honest she makes very ill-favouredly.

Nay, now thou goest from Fortune's office to Nature's: Fortune reigns in gifts of the world, not in the lineaments of Nature.

How now, wit! whither wander you? Mistress, you must come away to your father.

Were you made the messenger? No, by mine honour, but I was bid to come for you.

How prove you that, in the great heap of your Ay, marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom.

Stand you both forth now: stroke your chins, and swear by your beards that I am a knave.

Prithee, who is't that thou meanest? One that old Frederick, your father, loves.

My father's love is enough to honour him: enough! speak no more of him, you'll be whipped for taxation one of these days.

The more pity, that fools may not speak wisely what wise men do foolishly.

By my troth, thou sayest true, for since the little wit that fools have was silenced, the little foolery that wise men have makes a great show.

Which he will put on us, as pigeons feed their young.

Bon jour, Monsieur Le Beau: what's the news? Fair princess, you have lost much good sport.

Sport! of what colour? What colour, madam! how shall I answer you? As wit and fortune will.

Nay, if I keep not my rank,-- Thou losest thy old smell.

You amaze me, ladies: I would have told you of good wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.

I will tell you the beginning, and, if it please your ladyships, you may see the end, for the best is yet to do, and here, where you are, they are coming to perform it.

There comes an old man and his three sons,-- I could match this beginning with an old tale.

Three proper young men, of excellent growth and presence.

With bills on their necks, 'Be it known unto all men by these presents.

Yonder they lie, the poor old man, their father, making such pitiful dole over them that all the beholders take his part with weeping.

But what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies have lost? Why, this that I speak of.

Thus men may grow wiser every day: it is the first time that ever I heard breaking of ribs was sport for ladies.

Yonder, sure, they are coming: let us now stay and see it.

Enter DUKE FREDERICK, Lords, ORLANDO, CHARLES, and Attendants Come on: since the youth will not be entreated, his own peril on his forwardness.

How now, daughter and cousin! are you crept hither to see the wrestling? Ay, my liege, so please you give us leave.

You will take little delight in it, I can tell you, there is such odds in the man.

In pity of the challenger's youth I would fain dissuade him, but he will not be entreated.

Monsieur the challenger, the princesses call for you.

Young man, have you challenged Charles the wrestler? No, fair princess, he is the general challenger: I come but in, as others do, to try with him the strength of my youth.

Young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your years.

You have seen cruel proof of this man's strength: if you saw yourself with your eyes or knew yourself with your judgment, the fear of your adventure would counsel you to a more equal enterprise.

We pray you, for your own sake, to embrace your own safety and give over this attempt.

Do, young sir, your reputation shall not therefore be misprised: we will make it our suit to the duke that the wrestling might not go forward.

I beseech you, punish me not with your hard thoughts, wherein I confess me much guilty, to deny so fair and excellent ladies any thing.

The little strength that I have, I would it were with you.

No, I warrant your grace, you shall not entreat him to a second, that have so mightily persuaded him from a first.

An you mean to mock me after, you should not have mocked me before: but come your ways.

Now Hercules be thy speed, young man! I would I were invisible, to catch the strong fellow by the leg.

They wrestle O excellent young man! If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who should down.

Yes, I beseech your grace: I am not yet well breathed.

What is thy name, young man? Orlando, my liege, the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys.

But fare thee well, thou art a gallant youth: I would thou hadst told me of another father.

Were I my father, coz, would I do this? I am more proud to be Sir Rowland's son, His youngest son, and would not change that calling, To be adopted heir to Frederick.

Gentle cousin, Let us go thank him and encourage him: My father's rough and envious disposition Sticks me at heart.

Sir, you have well deserved: If you do keep your promises in love But justly, as you have exceeded all promise, Your mistress shall be happy.

Giving him a chain from her neck Wear this for me, one out of suits with fortune, That could give more, but that her hand lacks means.

Fare you well, fair gentleman. Can I not say, I thank you? My better parts Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.

He calls us back: my pride fell with my fortunes, I'll ask him what he would.

Did you call, sir? Sir, you have wrestled well and overthrown More than your enemies.

Fare you well. What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue? I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.

O poor Orlando, thou art overthrown! Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.

Re-enter LE BEAU Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you To leave this place.

Albeit you have deserved High commendation, true applause and love, Yet such is now the duke's condition That he misconstrues all that you have done.

The duke is humorous, what he is indeed, More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.

Sir, fare you well: Hereafter, in a better world than this, I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.

Thus must I from the smoke into the smother, From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother: But heavenly Rosalind! Why, cousin! why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy! not a word? Not one to throw at a dog.

No, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs, throw some of them at me, come, lame me with reasons.

Then there were two cousins laid up, when the one should be lamed with reasons and the other mad without any.

But is all this for your father? No, some of it is for my child's father.

O, how full of briers is this working-day world! They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in holiday foolery: if we walk not in the trodden paths our very petticoats will catch them.

I could shake them off my coat: these burs are in my heart.

O, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself! O, a good wish upon you! you will try in time, in despite of a fall.

Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son dearly? By this kind of chase, I should hate him, for my father hated his father dearly, yet I hate not Orlando.

Why should I not? doth he not deserve well? Let me love him for that, and do you love him because I do.

Look, here comes the duke. With his eyes full of anger.

Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste And get you from our court.

Me, uncle? You, cousin Within these ten days if that thou be'st found So near our public court as twenty miles, Thou diest for it.

Thus do all traitors: If their purgation did consist in words, They are as innocent as grace itself: Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.

Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor: Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.

Ay, Celia, we stay'd her for your sake, Else had she with her father ranged along.

She is too subtle for thee, and her smoothness, Her very silence and her patience Speak to the people, and they pity her.

Thou art a fool: she robs thee of thy name, And thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous When she is gone.

Then open not thy lips: Firm and irrevocable is my doom Which I have pass'd upon her, she is banish'd.

Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege: I cannot live out of her company.

You, niece, provide yourself: If you outstay the time, upon mine honour, And in the greatness of my word, you die.

O my poor Rosalind, whither wilt thou go? Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.

I charge thee, be not thou more grieved than I am.

Thou hast not, cousin, Prithee be cheerful: know'st thou not, the duke Hath banish'd me, his daughter? That he hath not.

No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one: Shall we be sunder'd? shall we part, sweet girl? No: let my father seek another heir.

Why, whither shall we go? To seek my uncle in the forest of Arden.

Alas, what danger will it be to us, Maids as we are, to travel forth so far! Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.

I'll put myself in poor and mean attire And with a kind of umber smirch my face, The like do you: so shall we pass along And never stir assailants.

What shall I call thee when thou art a man? I'll have no worse a name than Jove's own page, And therefore look you call me Ganymede.

But what will you be call'd? Something that hath a reference to my state No longer Celia, but Aliena.

But, cousin, what if we assay'd to steal The clownish fool out of your father's court? Would he not be a comfort to our travel? He'll go along o'er the wide world with me, Leave me alone to woo him.

Let's away, And get our jewels and our wealth together, Devise the fittest time and safest way To hide us from pursuit that will be made After my flight.

Now go we in content To liberty and not to banishment.

Happy is your grace, That can translate the stubbornness of fortune Into so quiet and so sweet a style.

Indeed, my lord, The melancholy Jaques grieves at that, And, in that kind, swears you do more usurp Than doth your brother that hath banish'd you.

But what said Jaques? Did he not moralize this spectacle? O, yes, into a thousand similes.

And did you leave him in this contemplation? We did, my lord, weeping and commenting Upon the sobbing deer.

Show me the place: I love to cope him in these sullen fits, For then he's full of matter.

Can it be possible that no man saw them? It cannot be: some villains of my court Are of consent and sufferance in this.

The ladies, her attendants of her chamber, Saw her abed, and in the morning early They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.

My lord, the roynish clown, at whom so oft Your grace was wont to laugh, is also missing.

Know you not, master, to some kind of men Their graces serve them but as enemies? No more do yours: your virtues, gentle master, Are sanctified and holy traitors to you.

This is no place, this house is but a butchery: Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.

Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go? No matter whither, so you come not here.

Master, go on, and I will follow thee, To the last gasp, with truth and loyalty.

From seventeen years till now almost fourscore Here lived I, but now live here no more.

At seventeen years many their fortunes seek, But at fourscore it is too late a week: Yet fortune cannot recompense me better Than to die well and not my master's debtor.

O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits! I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.

For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear you, yet I should bear no cross if I did bear you, for I think you have no money in your purse.

Ay, now am I in Arden, the more fool I, when I was at home, I was in a better place: but travellers must be content.

Look you, who comes here, a young man and an old in solemn talk.

O Corin, that thou knew'st how I do love her! I partly guess, for I have loved ere now.

O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe! Alas, poor shepherd! searching of thy wound, I have by hard adventure found mine own.

We that are true lovers run into strange capers, but as all is mortal in nature, so is all nature in love mortal in folly.

Nay, I shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till I break my shins against it.

Jove, Jove! this shepherd's passion Is much upon my fashion.

I pray you, one of you question yond man If he for gold will give us any food: I faint almost to death.

Holla, you clown! Peace, fool: he's not thy kinsman.

Good even to you, friend. And to you, gentle sir, and to you all.

What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture? That young swain that you saw here but erewhile, That little cares for buying any thing.

I pray thee, if it stand with honesty, Buy thou the cottage, pasture and the flock, And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.

I like this place. And willingly could waste my time in it.

Assuredly the thing is to be sold: Go with me: if you like upon report The soil, the profit and this kind of life, I will your very faithful feeder be And buy it with your gold right suddenly.

Under the greenwood tree Who loves to lie with me, And turn his merry note Unto the sweet bird's throat, Come hither, come hither, come hither: Here shall he see No enemy But winter and rough weather.

More, I prithee, more. I can suck melancholy out of a song, as a weasel sucks eggs.

I do not desire you to please me, I do desire you to sing.

Come, more, another stanzo: call you 'em stanzos? What you will, Monsieur Jaques.

Nay, I care not for their names, they owe me nothing.

Will you sing? More at your request than to please myself.

Come, sing, and you that will not, hold your tongues.

Sirs, cover the while, the duke will drink under this tree.

He is too disputable for my company: I think of as many matters as he, but I give heaven thanks and make no boast of them.

I'll give you a verse to this note that I made yesterday in despite of my invention.

What's that 'ducdame'? 'Tis a Greek invocation, to call fools into a circle.

I'll go sleep, if I can, if I cannot, I'll rail against all the first-born of Egypt.

And I'll go seek the duke: his banquet is prepared.

O, I die for food! Here lie I down, and measure out my grave.

Why, how now, Adam! no greater heart in thee? Live a little, comfort a little, cheer thyself a little.

If this uncouth forest yield any thing savage, I will either be food for it or bring it for food to thee.

Well said! thou lookest cheerly, and I'll be with thee quickly.

Yet thou liest in the bleak air: come, I will bear thee to some shelter, and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner, if there live any thing in this desert.

Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, and Lords like outlaws I think he be transform'd into a beast, For I can no where find him like a man.

My lord, he is but even now gone hence: Here was he merry, hearing of a song.

If he, compact of jars, grow musical, We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.

When I did hear The motley fool thus moral on the time, My lungs began to crow like chanticleer, That fools should be so deep-contemplative, And I did laugh sans intermission An hour by his dial.

O noble fool! A worthy fool! Motley's the only wear.

O that I were a fool! I am ambitious for a motley coat.

It is my only suit, Provided that you weed your better judgments Of all opinion that grows rank in them That I am wise.

I must have liberty Withal, as large a charter as the wind, To blow on whom I please, for so fools have, And they that are most galled with my folly, They most must laugh.

Invest me in my motley, give me leave To speak my mind, and I will through and through Cleanse the foul body of the infected world, If they will patiently receive my medicine.

But forbear, I say: He dies that touches any of this fruit Till I and my affairs are answered.

An you will not be answered with reason, I must die.

What would you have? Your gentleness shall force More than your force move us to gentleness.

Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you: I thought that all things had been savage here, And therefore put I on the countenance Of stern commandment.

Then but forbear your food a little while, Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn And give it food.

There is an old poor man, Who after me hath many a weary step Limp'd in pure love: till he be first sufficed, Oppress'd with two weak evils, age and hunger, I will not touch a bit.

Go find him out, And we will nothing waste till you return.

I thank ye, and be blest for your good comfort! Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy: This wide and universal theatre Presents more woeful pageants than the scene Wherein we play in.

All the world's a stage, And all the men and women merely players: They have their exits and their entrances, And one man in his time plays many parts, His acts being seven ages.

At first the infant, Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.

And then the whining school-boy, with his satchel And shining morning face, creeping like snail Unwillingly to school.

And then the lover, Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad Made to his mistress' eyebrow.

Then a soldier, Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard, Jealous in honour, sudden and quick in quarrel, Seeking the bubble reputation Even in the cannon's mouth.

And then the justice, In fair round belly with good capon lined, With eyes severe and beard of formal cut, Full of wise saws and modern instances, And so he plays his part.

Last scene of all, That ends this strange eventful history, Is second childishness and mere oblivion, Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.

Set down your venerable burthen, And let him feed.

So had you need: I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.

Welcome, fall to: I will not trouble you As yet, to question you about your fortunes.

Thou art not so unkind As man's ingratitude, Thy tooth is not so keen, Because thou art not seen, Although thy breath be rude.

Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the green holly: Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly: Then, heigh-ho, the holly! This life is most jolly.

Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky, That dost not bite so nigh As benefits forgot: Though thou the waters warp, Thy sting is not so sharp As friend remember'd not.

Good old man, Thou art right welcome as thy master is.

Give me your hand, And let me all your fortunes understand.

Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be: But were I not the better part made mercy, I should not seek an absent argument Of my revenge, thou present.

But look to it: Find out thy brother, wheresoe'er he is, Seek him with candle, bring him dead or living Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more To seek a living in our territory.

Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine Worth seizure do we seize into our hands, Till thou canst quit thee by thy brothers mouth Of what we think against thee.

O that your highness knew my heart in this! I never loved my brother in my life.

Well, push him out of doors, And let my officers of such a nature Make an extent upon his house and lands: Do this expediently and turn him going.

Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love: And thou, thrice-crowned queen of night, survey With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above, Thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway.

O Rosalind! these trees shall be my books And in their barks my thoughts I'll character, That every eye which in this forest looks Shall see thy virtue witness'd every where.

Run, run, Orlando, carve on every tree The fair, the chaste and unexpressive she.

And how like you this shepherd's life, Master Touchstone? Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good life, but in respect that it is a shepherd's life, it is naught.

In respect that it is solitary, I like it very well, but in respect that it is private, it is a very vile life.

Now, in respect it is in the fields, it pleaseth me well, but in respect it is not in the court, it is tedious.

As is it a spare life, look you, it fits my humour well, but as there is no more plenty in it, it goes much against my stomach.

Truly, thou art damned like an ill-roasted egg, all on one side.

Why, if thou never wast at court, thou never sawest good manners, if thou never sawest good manners, then thy manners must be wicked, and wickedness is sin, and sin is damnation.

Not a whit, Touchstone: those that are good manners at the court are as ridiculous in the country as the behavior of the country is most mockable at the court.

You told me you salute not at the court, but you kiss your hands: that courtesy would be uncleanly, if courtiers were shepherds.

Why, we are still handling our ewes, and their fells, you know, are greasy.

Why, do not your courtier's hands sweat? and is not the grease of a mutton as wholesome as the sweat of a man? Shallow, shallow.

A better instance, I say, come. Besides, our hands are hard.

And they are often tarred over with the surgery of our sheep: and would you have us kiss tar? The courtier's hands are perfumed with civet.

Most shallow man! thou worms-meat, in respect of a good piece of flesh indeed! Learn of the wise, and perpend: civet is of a baser birth than tar, the very uncleanly flux of a cat.

Mend the instance, shepherd. You have too courtly a wit for me: I'll rest.

Wilt thou rest damned? God help thee, shallow man! God make incision in thee! thou art raw.

If thou beest not damned for this, the devil himself will have no shepherds, I cannot see else how thou shouldst Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistress's brother.

From the east to western Ind, No jewel is like Rosalind.

Her worth, being mounted on the wind, Through all the world bears Rosalind.

All the pictures fairest lined Are but black to Rosalind.

Let no fair be kept in mind But the fair of Rosalind.

I'll rhyme you so eight years together, dinners and suppers and sleeping-hours excepted: it is the right butter-women's rank to market.

Out, fool! For a taste: If a hart do lack a hind, Let him seek out Rosalind.

If the cat will after kind, So be sure will Rosalind.

Winter garments must be lined, So must slender Rosalind.

They that reap must sheaf and bind, Then to cart with Rosalind.

Sweetest nut hath sourest rind, Such a nut is Rosalind.

He that sweetest rose will find Must find love's prick and Rosalind.

This is the very false gallop of verses: why do you infect yourself with them? Peace, you dull fool! I found them on a tree.

You have said, but whether wisely or no, let the forest judge.

Peace! Here comes my sister, reading: stand aside.

Thus Rosalind of many parts By heavenly synod was devised, Of many faces, eyes and hearts, To have the touches dearest prized.

Heaven would that she these gifts should have, And I to live and die her slave.

O most gentle pulpiter! what tedious homily of love have you wearied your parishioners withal, and never cried 'Have patience, good people!' How now! back, friends! Shepherd, go off a little.

Come, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat, though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.

Didst thou hear these verses? O, yes, I heard them all, and more too, for some of them had in them more feet than the verses would bear.

Ay, but the feet were lame and could not bear themselves without the verse and therefore stood lamely in the verse.

I was never so be-rhymed since Pythagoras' time, that I was an Irish rat, which I can hardly remember.

Trow you who hath done this? Is it a man? And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck.

Change you colour? I prithee, who? O Lord, Lord! it is a hard matter for friends to meet, but mountains may be removed with earthquakes and so encounter.

Nay, but who is it? Is it possible? Nay, I prithee now with most petitionary vehemence, tell me who it is.

I would thou couldst stammer, that thou mightst pour this concealed man out of thy mouth, as wine comes out of a narrow- mouthed bottle, either too much at once, or none at all.

I prithee, take the cork out of thy mouth that may drink thy tidings.

Is he of God's making? What manner of man? Is his head worth a hat, or his chin worth a beard? Nay, he hath but a little beard.

Why, God will send more, if the man will be thankful: let me stay the growth of his beard, if thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.

It is young Orlando, that tripped up the wrestler's heels and your heart both in an instant.

Nay, but the devil take mocking: speak, sad brow and true maid.

You must borrow me Gargantua's mouth first: 'tis a word too great for any mouth of this age's size.

To say ay and no to these particulars is more than to answer in a catechism.

It may well be called Jove's tree, when it drops forth such fruit.

There lay he, stretched along, like a wounded knight.

Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well becomes the ground.

Cry 'holla' to thy tongue, I prithee, it curvets unseasonably.

He was furnished like a hunter. O, ominous! he comes to kill my heart.

I would sing my song without a burden: thou bringest me out of tune.

Do you not know I am a woman? when I think, I must speak.

Soft! comes he not here? 'Tis he: slink by, and note him.

I thank you for your company, but, good faith, I had as lief have been myself alone.

And so had I, but yet, for fashion sake, I thank you too for your society.

I pray you, mar no more trees with writing love-songs in their barks.

I pray you, mar no more of my verses with reading them ill-favouredly.

There was no thought of pleasing you when she was What stature is she of? Just as high as my heart.

Have you not been acquainted with goldsmiths' wives, and conned them out of rings? Not so, but I answer you right painted cloth, from whence you have studied your questions.

You have a nimble wit: I think 'twas made of Atalanta's heels.

Will you sit down with me? and we two will rail against our mistress the world and all our misery.

I will chide no breather in the world but myself, against whom I know most faults.

'Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue.

By my troth, I was seeking for a fool when I found He is drowned in the brook: look but in, and you shall see him.

I'll tarry no longer with you: farewell, good Signior Love.

I am glad of your departure: adieu, good Monsieur lackey and under that habit play the knave with him.

Do you hear, forester? Very well: what would you? I pray you, what is't o'clock? You should ask me what time o' day: there's no clock in the forest.

Then there is no true lover in the forest, else sighing every minute and groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot of Time as well as a clock.

And why not the swift foot of Time? had not that been as proper? By no means, sir: Time travels in divers paces with divers persons.

I'll tell you who Time ambles withal, who Time trots withal, who Time gallops withal and who he stands still withal.

Who doth he gallop withal? With a thief to the gallows, for though he go as softly as foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there.

Who stays it still withal? With lawyers in the vacation, for they sleep between term and term and then they perceive not how Time moves.

Where dwell you, pretty youth? With this shepherdess, my sister, here in the skirts of the forest, like fringe upon a petticoat.

Are you native of this place? As the cony that you see dwell where she is kindled.

Your accent is something finer than you could purchase in so removed a dwelling.

I have been told so of many: but indeed an old religious uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was in his youth an inland man, one that knew courtship too well, for there he fell in love.

I have heard him read many lectures against it, and I thank God I am not a woman, to be touched with so many giddy offences as he hath generally taxed their whole sex withal.

No, I will not cast away my physic but on those that are sick.

I am he that is so love-shaked: I pray you tell me your remedy.

There is none of my uncle's marks upon you: he taught me how to know a man in love, in which cage of rushes I am sure you are not prisoner.

Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe I love.

But, in good sooth, are you he that hangs the verses on the trees, wherein Rosalind is so admired? I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.

But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak? Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.

Yet I profess curing it by counsel. Did you ever cure any so? Yes, one, and in this manner.

And thus I cured him, and this way will I take upon me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheep's heart, that there shall not be one spot of love in't.

I would cure you, if you would but call me Rosalind and come every day to my cote and woo me.

Now, by the faith of my love, I will: tell me where it is.

Go with me to it and I'll show it you and by the way you shall tell me where in the forest you live.

Come, sister, will you go? Come apace, good Audrey: I will fetch up your goats, Audrey.

in a thatched house! When a man's verses cannot be understood, nor a man's good wit seconded with the forward child Understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room.

Do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical? I do, truly, for thou swearest to me thou art honest: now, if thou wert a poet, I might have some hope thou didst feign.

Would you not have me honest? No, truly, unless thou wert hard-favoured, for honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.

Well, I am not fair, and therefore I pray the gods make me honest.

Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut were to put good meat into an unclean dish.

I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am foul.

Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness! sluttishness may come hereafter.

A man may, if he were of a fearful heart, stagger in this attempt, for here we have no temple but the wood, no assembly but horn-beasts.

But what though? C ourage! As horns are odious, they are necessary.

It is said, 'many a man knows no end of his goods:' right, many a man has good horns, and knows no end of them.

Well, that is the dowry of his wife, 'tis none of his own getting.

Poor men alone? No, no, the noblest deer hath them as huge as the rascal.

Truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.

Good even, good Master What-ye-call't: how do you, sir? You are very well met: God 'ild you for your last company: I am very glad to see you: even a toy in hand here, sir: nay, pray be covered.

Will you be married, motley? As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb and the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires, and as pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibbling.

married of him than of another: for he is not like to marry me well, and not being well married, it will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my wife.

'Come, sweet Audrey: We must be married, or we must live in bawdry.

Farewell, good Master Oliver: not,-- O sweet Oliver, O brave Oliver, Leave me not behind thee: but,-- Wind away, Begone, I say, I will not to wedding with thee.

'Tis no matter: ne'er a fantastical knave of them all shall flout me out of my calling.

Do, I prithee, but yet have the grace to consider that tears do not become a man.

But have I not cause to weep? As good cause as one would desire, therefore weep.

Something browner than Judas's marry, his kisses are Judas's own children.

An excellent colour: your chestnut was ever the only colour.

And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch of holy bread.

He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana: a nun of winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously, the very ice of chastity is in them.

But why did he swear he would come this morning, and comes not? Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.

Do you think so? Yes, I think he is not a pick-purse nor a horse-stealer, but for his verity in love, I do think him as concave as a covered goblet or a worm-eaten nut.

Not true in love? Yes, when he is in, but I think he is not in.

'Was' is not 'is:' besides, the oath of a lover is no stronger than the word of a tapster, they are both the confirmer of false reckonings.

He attends here in the forest on the duke your father.

I met the duke yesterday and had much question with him: he asked me of what parentage I was, I told him, of as good as he, so he laughed and let me go.

O, come, let us remove: The sight of lovers feedeth those in love.

Bring us to this sight, and you shall say I'll prove a busy actor in their play.

Sweet Phebe, do not scorn me, do not, Phebe, Say that you love me not, but say not so In bitterness.

O dear Phebe, If ever,--as that ever may be near,-- You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy, Then shall you know the wounds invisible That love's keen arrows make.

But till that time Come not thou near me: and when that time comes, Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not, As till that time I shall not pity thee.

Sweet youth, I pray you, chide a year together: I had rather hear you chide than this man woo.

He's fallen in love with your foulness and she'll fall in love with my anger.

If it be so, as fast as she answers thee with frowning looks, I'll sauce her with bitter words.

Why look you so upon me? For no ill will I bear you.

I pray you, do not fall in love with me, For I am falser than vows made in wine: Besides, I like you not.

If you will know my house, 'Tis at the tuft of olives here hard by.

Shepherdess, look on him better, And be not proud: though all the world could see, None could be so abused in sight as he.

Dead Shepherd, now I find thy saw of might, 'Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?' Sweet Phebe,-- Ha, what say'st thou, Silvius? Sweet Phebe, pity me.

Wherever sorrow is, relief would be: If you do sorrow at my grief in love, By giving love your sorrow and my grief Were both extermined.

Thou hast my love: is not that neighbourly? I would have you.

Know'st now the youth that spoke to me erewhile? Not very well, but I have met him oft, And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds That the old carlot once was master of.

Think not I love him, though I ask for him: 'Tis but a peevish boy, yet he talks well, But what care I for words? yet words do well When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.

I'll write to him a very taunting letter, And thou shalt bear it: wilt thou, Silvius? Phebe, with all my heart.

I'll write it straight, The matter's in my head and in my heart: I will be bitter with him and passing short.

I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted with thee.

Those that are in extremity of either are abominable fellows and betray themselves to every modern censure worse than drunkards.

A traveller! By my faith, you have great reason to be sad: I fear you have sold your own lands to see other men's, then, to have seen much and to have nothing, is to have rich eyes and poor hands.

Why, how now, Orlando! where have you been all this while? You a lover! An you serve me such another trick, never come in my sight more.

My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.

Nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight: I had as lief be wooed of a snail.

Of a snail? Ay, of a snail, for though he comes slowly, he carries his house on his head, a better jointure, I think, than you make a woman: besides he brings his destiny with him.

What's that? Why, horns, which such as you are fain to be beholding to your wives for: but he comes armed in his fortune and prevents the slander of his wife.

Virtue is no horn-maker, and my Rosalind is virtuous.

It pleases him to call you so, but he hath a Rosalind of a better leer than you.

Come, woo me, woo me, for now I am in a holiday humour and like enough to consent.

What would you say to me now, an I were your very very Rosalind? I would kiss before I spoke.

Nay, you were better speak first, and when you were gravelled for lack of matter, you might take occasion to kiss.

Very good orators, when they are out, they will spit, and for lovers lacking--God warn us!--matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.

How if the kiss be denied? Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.

Who could be out, being before his beloved mistress? Marry, that should you, if I were your mistress, or I should think my honesty ranker than my wit.

What, of my suit? Not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit.

Am not I your Rosalind? I take some joy to say you are, because I would be talking of her.

The poor world is almost six thousand years old, and in all this time there was not any man died in his own person, videlicit, in a love-cause.

Troilus had his brains dashed out with a Grecian club, yet he did what he could to die before, and he is one of the patterns of love.

But these are all lies: men have died from time to time and worms have eaten them, but not for love.

I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind, for, I protest, her frown might kill me.

But come, now I will be your Rosalind in a more coming-on disposition, and ask me what you will.

Yes, faith, will I, Fridays and Saturdays and all.

Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing? Come, sister, you shall be the priest and marry us.

Will you, Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind? I will.

Ay, but when? Why now, as fast as she can marry us.

Then you must say 'I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.

I might ask you for your commission, but I do take thee, Orlando, for my husband: there's a girl goes before the priest, and certainly a woman's thought runs before her actions.

Now tell me how long you would have her after you have possessed her.

No, no, Orlando, men are April when they woo, December when they wed: maids are May when they are maids, but the sky changes when they are wives.

But will my Rosalind do so? By my life, she will do as I do.

A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say 'Wit, whither wilt?' Nay, you might keep that cheque for it till you met your wife's wit going to your neighbour's bed.

And what wit could wit have to excuse that? Marry, to say she came to seek you there.

You shall never take her without her answer, unless you take her without her tongue.

O, that woman that cannot make her fault her husband's occasion, let her never nurse her child herself, for she will breed it like a fool! For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave thee.

I must attend the duke at dinner: by two o'clock I will be with thee again.

With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my Rosalind: so adieu.

Well, Time is the old justice that examines all such offenders, and let Time try: adieu.

You have simply misused our sex in your love-prate: we must have your doublet and hose plucked over your head, and show the world what the bird hath done to her own nest.

O coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou didst know how many fathom deep I am in love! But it cannot be sounded: my affection hath an unknown bottom, like the bay of Portugal.

Or rather, bottomless, that as fast as you pour affection in, it runs out.

I'll tell thee, Aliena, I cannot be out of the sight of Orlando: I'll go find a shadow and sigh till he come.

Let's present him to the duke, like a Roman conqueror, and it would do well to set the deer's horns upon his head, for a branch of victory.

Have you no song, forester, for this purpose? Yes, sir.

Sing it: 'tis no matter how it be in tune, so it make noise enough.

What shall he have that kill'd the deer? His leather skin and horns to wear.

How say you now? Is it not past two o'clock? and here much Orlando! I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain, he hath ta'en his bow and arrows and is gone forth to sleep.

'Od's my will! Her love is not the hare that I do hunt: Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well, This is a letter of your own device.

No, I protest, I know not the contents: Phebe did write it.

Come, come, you are a fool And turn'd into the extremity of love.

Will you hear the letter? So please you, for I never heard it yet, Yet heard too much of Phebe's cruelty.

Call you this chiding? Alas, poor shepherd! Do you pity him? no, he deserves no pity.

If you be a true lover, hence, and not a word, for here comes more company.

But at this hour the house doth keep itself, There's none within.

Are not you The owner of the house I did inquire for? It is no boast, being ask'd, to say we are.

Orlando doth commend him to you both, And to that youth he calls his Rosalind He sends this bloody napkin.

Are you he? I am: what must we understand by this? Some of my shame, if you will know of me What man I am, and how, and why, and where This handkercher was stain'd.

O, I have heard him speak of that same brother, And he did render him the most unnatural That lived amongst men.

And well he might so do, For well I know he was unnatural.

ROSALIND swoons Why, how now, Ganymede! sweet Ganymede! Many will swoon when they do look on blood.

I pray you, will you take him by the arm? Be of good cheer, youth: you a man! you lack a man's heart.

Ah, sirrah, a body would think this was well counterfeited! I pray you, tell your brother how well I counterfeited.

Heigh-ho! This was not counterfeit: there is too great testimony in your complexion that it was a passion of earnest.

Well then, take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man.

So I do: but, i' faith, I should have been a woman by right.

Come, you look paler and paler: pray you, draw homewards.

Good sir, go with us. That will I, for I must bear answer back How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.

I shall devise something: but, I pray you, commend my counterfeiting to him.

Will you go? We shall find a time, Audrey, patience, gentle Audrey.

Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old gentleman's saying.

A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile Martext.

But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the forest lays claim to you.

Ay, I know who 'tis, he hath no interest in me in the world: here comes the man you mean.

It is meat and drink to me to see a clown: by my troth, we that have good wits have much to answer for, we shall be flouting, we cannot hold.

Cover thy head, cover thy head, nay, prithee, be covered.

Wast born i' the forest here? Ay, sir, I thank God.

'So so' is good, very good, very excellent good, and yet it is not, it is but so so.

I do now remember a saying, 'The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be a fool.

The heathen philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape, would open his lips when he put it into his mouth, meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and lips to open.

Which he, sir? He, sir, that must marry this woman.

Our master and mistress seeks you, come, away, away! Trip, Audrey! trip, Audrey! I attend, I attend.

Let your wedding be to-morrow: thither will I invite the duke and all's contented followers.

Go you and prepare Aliena, for look you, here comes my Rosalind.

O, my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee wear thy heart in a scarf! It is my arm.

I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a lion.

Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to swoon when he showed me your handkerchief? Ay, and greater wonders than that.

They shall be married to-morrow, and I will bid the duke to the nuptial.

Why then, to-morrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind? I can live no longer by thinking.

I will weary you then no longer with idle talking.

Believe then, if you please, that I can do strange things: I have, since I was three year old, conversed with a magician, most profound in his art and yet not damnable.

Speakest thou in sober meanings? By my life, I do, which I tender dearly, though I say I am a magician.

Therefore, put you in your best array: bid your friends, for if you will be married to-morrow, you shall, and to Rosalind, if you will.

Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.

Youth, you have done me much ungentleness, To show the letter that I writ to you.

I care not if I have: it is my study To seem despiteful and ungentle to you: You are there followed by a faithful shepherd, Look upon him, love him, he worships you.

It is to be all made of sighs and tears, And so am I for Phebe.

It is to be all made of faith and service, And so am I for Phebe.

Pray you, no more of this, 'tis like the howling of Irish wolves against the moon.

To SILVIUS I will help you, if I can: To PHEBE I would love you, if I could.

To ORLANDO As you love Rosalind, meet: To SILVIUS as you love Phebe, meet: and as I love no woman, I'll meet.

So fare you well: I have left you commands. I'll not fail, if I live.

To-morrow is the joyful day, Audrey, to-morrow will we be married.

I do desire it with all my heart, and I hope it is no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the world.

Here comes two of the banished duke's pages. Well met, honest gentleman.

Come, sit, sit, and a song. We are for you: sit i' the middle.

Shall we clap into't roundly, without hawking or spitting or saying we are hoarse, which are the only prologues to a bad voice? I'faith, i'faith, and both in a tune, like two gipsies on a horse.

Between the acres of the rye, With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino These pretty country folks would lie, In spring time,  and c.

This carol they began that hour, With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino, How that a life was but a flower In spring time,  and c.

And therefore take the present time, With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino, For love is crowned with the prime In spring time,  and c.

Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great matter in the ditty, yet the note was very You are deceived, sir: we kept time, we lost not our time.

By my troth, yes, I count it but time lost to hear such a foolish song.

God be wi' you, and God mend your voices! Come, Audrey.

Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy Can do all this that he hath promised? I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not, As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.

Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged: You say, if I bring in your Rosalind, You will bestow her on Orlando here? That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.

And you say, you will have her, when I bring her? That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.

You say, you'll marry me, if I be willing? That will I, should I die the hour after.

But if you do refuse to marry me, You'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd? So is the bargain.

You say, that you'll have Phebe, if she will? Though to have her and death were both one thing.

If she refuse me: and from hence I go, To make these doubts all even.

I do remember in this shepherd boy Some lively touches of my daughter's favour.

There is, sure, another flood toward, and these couples are coming to the ark.

Here comes a pair of very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools.

Salutation and greeting to you all! Good my lord, bid him welcome: this is the motley-minded gentleman that I have so often met in the forest: he hath been a courtier, he swears.

If any man doubt that, let him put me to my purgation.

I have trod a measure, I have flattered a lady, I have been politic with my friend, smooth with mine enemy, I have undone three tailors, I have had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.

And how was that ta'en up? Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the seventh cause.

How seventh cause? Good my lord, like this fellow.

According to the fool's bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.

But, for the seventh cause, how did you find the quarrel on the seventh cause? Upon a lie seven times removed:--bear your body more seeming, Audrey:--as thus, sir.

I did dislike the cut of a certain courtier's beard: he sent me word, if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the mind it was: this is called the Retort Courteous.

If I sent him word again 'it was not well cut,' he would send me word, he cut it to please himself: this is called the Quip Modest.

If again 'it was not well cut,' he disabled my judgment: this is called the Reply Churlish.

If again 'it was not well cut,' he would answer, I spake not true: this is called the Reproof Valiant.

If again 'it was not well cut,' he would say I lied: this is called the Counter-cheque Quarrelsome: and so to the Lie Circumstantial and the Lie Direct.

And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut? I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial, nor he durst not give me the Lie Direct, and so we measured swords and parted.

Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie? O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book, as you have books for good manners: I will name you the degrees.

All these you may avoid but the Lie Direct, and you may avoid that too, with an If.

Your If is the only peacemaker, much virtue in If.

Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? he's as good at any thing and yet a fool.

He uses his folly like a stalking-horse and under the presentation of that he shoots his wit.

Still Music Then is there mirth in heaven, When earthly things made even Atone together.

Good duke, receive thy daughter Hymen from heaven brought her, Yea, brought her hither, That thou mightst join her hand with his Whose heart within his bosom is.

If sight and shape be true, Why then, my love adieu! I'll have no father, if you be not he: I'll have no husband, if you be not he: Nor ne'er wed woman, if you be not she.

Peace, ho! I bar confusion: 'Tis I must make conclusion Of these most strange events: Here's eight that must take hands To join in Hymen's bands, If truth holds true contents.

You and you no cross shall part: You and you are heart in heart You to his love must accord, Or have a woman to your lord: You and you are sure together, As the winter to foul weather.

Whiles a wedlock-hymn we sing, Feed yourselves with questioning, That reason wonder may diminish, How thus we met, and these things finish.

I will not eat my word, now thou art mine, Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.

Let me have audience for a word or two: I am the second son of old Sir Rowland, That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.

Welcome, young man, Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding: To one his lands withheld, and to the other A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.

Meantime, forget this new-fall'n dignity And fall into our rustic revelry.

Play, music! And you, brides and bridegrooms all, With measure heap'd in joy, to the measures fall.

If I heard you rightly, The duke hath put on a religious life And thrown into neglect the pompous court? He hath.

To him will I : out of these convertites There is much matter to be heard and learn'd.

So, to your pleasures: I am for other than for dancing measures.

To see no pastime I	what you would have I'll stay to know at your abandon'd cave.

Proceed, proceed: we will begin these rites, As we do trust they'll end, in true delights.

A dance It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue, but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord the prologue.

If it be true that good wine needs no bush, 'tis true that a good play needs no epilogue, yet to good wine they do use good bushes, and good plays prove the better by the help of good epilogues.

Enter ANTONY, CLEOPATRA, her Ladies, the Train, with Eunuchs fanning her Look, where they come: Take but good note, and you shall see in him.

The triple pillar of the world transform'd Into a strumpet's fool: behold and see.

Then must thou needs find out new heaven, new earth.

How, my love! Perchance! nay, and most like: You must not stay here longer, your dismission Is come from Caesar, therefore hear it, Antony.

Where's Fulvia's process? Caesar's I would say? both? Call in the messengers.

As I am Egypt's queen, Thou blushest, Antony, and that blood of thine Is Caesar's homager: else so thy cheek pays shame When shrill-tongued Fulvia scolds.

The messengers! Let Rome in Tiber melt, and the wide arch Of the ranged empire fall! Here is my space.

Excellent falsehood! Why did he marry Fulvia, and not love her? I'll seem the fool I am not, Antony Will be himself.

Now, for the love of Love and her soft hours, Let's not confound the time with conference harsh: There's not a minute of our lives should stretch Without some pleasure now.

Come, my queen, Last night you did desire it: speak not to us.

Is Caesar with Antonius prized so slight? Sir, sometimes, when he is not Antony, He comes too short of that great property Which still should go with Antony.

I am full sorry That he approves the common liar, who Thus speaks of him at Rome: but I will hope Of better deeds to-morrow.

Bring in the banquet quickly, wine enough Cleopatra's health to drink.

Wrinkles forbid! Vex not his prescience, be attentive.

You have seen and proved a fairer former fortune Than that which is to approach.

Then belike my children shall have no names: prithee, how many boys and wenches must I have? If every of your wishes had a womb.

You think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes.

Mine, and most of our fortunes, to-night, shall be--drunk to bed.

There's a palm presages chastity, if nothing else.

Nay, if an oily palm be not a fruitful prognostication, I cannot scratch mine ear.

Am I not an inch of fortune better than she? Well, if you were but an inch of fortune better than I, where would you choose it? Not in my husband's nose.

He was disposed to mirth, but on the sudden A Roman thought hath struck him.

My lord approaches. We will not look upon him: go with us.

Well, what worst? The nature of bad news infects the teller.

'Tis thus: Who tells me true, though in his tale lie death, I hear him as he flatter'd.

O, then we bring forth weeds, When our quick minds lie still, and our ills told us Is as our earing.

From Sicyon, ho, the news! Speak there! The man from Sicyon,--is there such an one? He stays upon your will.

These strong Egyptian fetters I must break, Or lose myself in dotage.

Where died she? In Sicyon: Her length of sickness, with what else more serious Importeth thee to know, this bears.

I must from this enchanting queen break off: Ten thousand harms, more than the ills I know, My idleness doth hatch.

How now! Enobarbus! Re-enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS What's your pleasure, sir? I must with haste from hence.

Why, then, we kill all our women: we see how mortal an unkindness is to them, if they suffer our departure, death's the word.

Under a compelling occasion, let women die, it were pity to cast them away for nothing, though, between them and a great cause, they should be esteemed nothing.

O, sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece of work, which not to have been blest withal would have discredited your travel.

When it pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a man from him, it shows to man the tailors of the earth, comforting therein, that when old robes are worn out, there are members to make new.

The business she hath broached in the state Cannot endure my absence.

And the business you have broached here cannot be without you, especially that of Cleopatra's, which wholly depends on your abode.

I shall break The cause of our expedience to the queen, And get her leave to part.

Say, our pleasure, To such whose place is under us, requires Our quick remove from hence.

See where he is, who's with him, what he does: I did not send you: if you find him sad, Say I am dancing, if in mirth, report That I am sudden sick: quick, and return.

Madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly, You do not hold the method to enforce The like from him.

What should I do, I do not? In each thing give him way, cross him nothing.

Tempt him not so too far, I wish, forbear: In time we hate that which we often fear.

I am sorry to give breathing to my purpose,-- Help me away, dear Charmian, I shall fall: It cannot be thus long, the sides of nature Will not sustain it.

Now, my dearest queen,-- Pray you, stand further from me.

What's the matter? I know, by that same eye, there's some good news.

What says the married woman? You may go: Would she had never given you leave to come! Let her not say 'tis I that keep you here: I have no power upon you, hers you are.

The gods best know,-- O, never was there queen So mightily betray'd! yet at the first I saw the treasons planted.

How now, lady! I would I had thy inches, thou shouldst know There were a heart in Egypt.

Hear me, queen: The strong necessity of time commands Our services awhile, but my full heart Remains in use with you.

O most false love! Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see, In Fulvia's death, how mine received shall be.

Quarrel no more, but be prepared to know The purposes I bear, which are, or cease, As you shall give the advice.

By the fire That quickens Nilus' slime, I go from hence Thy soldier, servant, making peace or war As thou affect'st.

Cut my lace, Charmian, come, But let it be: I am quickly ill, and well, So Antony loves.

My precious queen, forbear, And give true evidence to his love, which stands An honourable trial.

I prithee, turn aside and weep for her, Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears Belong to Egypt: good now, play one scene Of excellent dissembling, and let it look Life perfect honour.

Look, prithee, Charmian, How this Herculean Roman does become The carriage of his chafe.

Sir, you and I must part, but that's not it: Sir, you and I have loved, but there's not it, That you know well: something it is I would, O, my oblivion is a very Antony, And I am all forgotten.

But that your royalty Holds idleness your subject, I should take you For idleness itself.

'Tis sweating labour To bear such idleness so near the heart As Cleopatra this.

But, sir, forgive me, Since my becomings kill me, when they do not Eye well to you: your honour calls you hence, Therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly.

And all the gods go with you! upon your sword Sit laurel victory! and smooth success Be strew'd before your feet! Let us go.

Come, Our separation so abides, and flies, That thou, residing here, go'st yet with me, And I, hence fleeting, here remain with thee.

Thy biddings have been done, and every hour, Most noble Caesar, shalt thou have report How 'tis abroad.

Pompey is strong at sea, And it appears he is beloved of those That only have fear'd Caesar: to the ports The discontents repair, and men's reports Give him much wrong'd.

It hath been taught us from the primal state, That he which is was wish'd until he were, And the ebb'd man, ne'er loved till ne'er worth love, Comes dear'd by being lack'd.

This common body, Like to a vagabond flag upon the stream, Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide, To rot itself with motion.

Let his shames quickly Drive him to Rome: 'tis time we twain Did show ourselves i' the field, and to that end Assemble we immediate council: Pompey Thrives in our idleness.

To-morrow, Caesar, I shall be furnish'd to inform you rightly Both what by sea and land I can be able To front this present time.

Farewell. Farewell, my lord: what you shall know meantime Of stirs abroad, I shall beseech you, sir, To let me be partaker.

Why, madam? That I might sleep out this great gap of time My Antony is away.

Not in deed, madam, for I can do nothing But what indeed is honest to be done: Yet have I fierce affections, and think What Venus did with Mars.

He's speaking now, Or murmuring 'Where's my serpent of old Nile?' For so he calls me: now I feed myself With most delicious poison.

Sovereign of Egypt, hail! How much unlike art thou Mark Antony! Yet, coming from him, that great medicine hath With his tinct gilded thee.

How goes it with my brave Mark Antony? Last thing he did, dear queen, He kiss'd,--the last of many doubled kisses,-- This orient pearl.

His speech sticks in my heart. Mine ear must pluck it thence.

So he nodded, And soberly did mount an arm-gaunt steed, Who neigh'd so high, that what I would have spoke Was beastly dumb'd by him.

What, was he sad or merry? Like to the time o' the year between the extremes Of hot and cold, he was nor sad nor merry.

Met'st thou my posts? Ay, madam, twenty several messengers: Why do you send so thick? Who's born that day When I forget to send to Antony, Shall die a beggar.

Did I, Charmian, Ever love Caesar so? O that brave Caesar! Be choked with such another emphasis! Say, the brave Antony.

The valiant Caesar! By Isis, I will give thee bloody teeth, If thou with Caesar paragon again My man of men.

By your most gracious pardon, I sing but after you.

My salad days, When I was green in judgment: cold in blood, To say as I said then! But, come, away, Get me ink and paper: He shall have every day a several greeting, Or I'll unpeople Egypt.

If the great gods be just, they shall assist The deeds of justest men.

Know, worthy Pompey, That what they do delay, they not deny.

Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays The thing we sue for.

We, ignorant of ourselves, Beg often our own harms, which the wise powers Deny us for our good, so find we profit By losing of our prayers.

I shall do well: The people love me, and the sea is mine, My powers are crescent, and my auguring hope Says it will come to the full.

Caesar and Lepidus Are in the field: a mighty strength they carry.

He dreams: I know they are in Rome together, Looking for Antony.

I cannot hope Caesar and Antony shall well greet together: His wife that's dead did trespasses to Caesar, His brother warr'd upon him, although, I think, Not moved by Antony.

I know not, Menas, How lesser enmities may give way to greater.

Be't as our gods will have't! It only stands Our lives upon to use our strongest hands.

Good Enobarbus, 'tis a worthy deed, And shall become you well, to entreat your captain To soft and gentle speech.

I shall entreat him To answer like himself: if Caesar move him, Let Antony look over Caesar's head And speak as loud as Mars.

By Jupiter, Were I the wearer of Antonius' beard, I would not shave't to-day.

Every time Serves for the matter that is then born in't.

Your speech is passion: But, pray you, stir no embers up.

If we compose well here, to Parthia: Hark, Ventidius.

Noble friends, That which combined us was most great, and let not A leaner action rend us.

I learn, you take things ill which are not so, Or being, concern you not.

My being in Egypt, Caesar, What was't to you? No more than my residing here at Rome Might be to you in Egypt: yet, if you there Did practise on my state, your being in Egypt Might be my question.

How intend you, practised? You may be pleased to catch at mine intent By what did here befal me.

Your wife and brother Made wars upon me, and their contestation Was theme for you, you were the word of war.

You do mistake your business, my brother never Did urge me in his act: I did inquire it, And have my learning from some true reports, That drew their swords with you.

Did he not rather Discredit my authority with yours, And make the wars alike against my stomach, Having alike your cause? Of this my letters Before did satisfy you.

If you'll patch a quarrel, As matter whole you have not to make it with, It must not be with this.

You praise yourself By laying defects of judgment to me, but You patch'd up your excuses.

As for my wife, I would you had her spirit in such another: The third o' the world is yours, which with a snaffle You may pace easy, but not such a wife.

I wrote to you When rioting in Alexandria, you Did pocket up my letters, and with taunts Did gibe my missive out of audience.

He fell upon me ere admitted: then Three kings I had newly feasted, and did want Of what I was i' the morning: but next day I told him of myself, which was as much As to have ask'd him pardon.

Let this fellow Be nothing of our strife, if we contend, Out of our question wipe him.

You have broken The article of your oath, which you shall never Have tongue to charge me with.

Soft, Caesar! Lepidus, let him speak: The honour is sacred which he talks on now, Supposing that I lack'd it.

To lend me arms and aid when I required them, The which you both denied.

Neglected, rather, And then when poison'd hours had bound me up From mine own knowledge.

As nearly as I may, I'll play the penitent to you: but mine honesty Shall not make poor my greatness, nor my power Work without it.

Truth is, that Fulvia, To have me out of Egypt, made wars here, For which myself, the ignorant motive, do So far ask pardon as befits mine honour To stoop in such a case.

If it might please you, to enforce no further The griefs between ye: to forget them quite Were to remember that the present need Speaks to atone you.

Or, if you borrow one another's love for the instant, you may, when you hear no more words of Pompey, return it again: you shall have time to wrangle in when you have nothing else to do.

I do not much dislike the matter, but The manner of his speech, for't cannot be We shall remain in friendship, our conditions So differing in their acts.

Yet if I knew What hoop should hold us stanch, from edge to edge O' the world I would pursue it.

Thou hast a sister by the mother's side, Admired Octavia: great Mark Antony Is now a widower.

Say not so, Agrippa: If Cleopatra heard you, your reproof Were well deserved of rashness.

I am not married, Caesar: let me hear Agrippa further speak.

Pardon what I have spoke, For 'tis a studied, not a present thought, By duty ruminated.

Will Caesar speak? Not till he hears how Antony is touch'd With what is spoke already.

What power is in Agrippa, If I would say, 'Agrippa, be it so,' To make this good? The power of Caesar, and His power unto Octavia.

Time calls upon's: Of us must Pompey presently be sought, Or else he seeks out us.

What is his strength by land? Great and increasing: but by sea He is an absolute master.

Would we had spoke together! Haste we for it: Yet, ere we put ourselves in arms, dispatch we The business we have talk'd of.

With most gladness: And do invite you to my sister's view, Whither straight I'll lead you.

Exeunt OCTAVIUS CAESAR, MARK ANTONY, and LEPIDUS Welcome from Egypt, sir.

Half the heart of Caesar, worthy Mecaenas! My honourable friend, Agrippa! Good Enobarbus! We have cause to be glad that matters are so well digested.

You stayed well by 't in Egypt. Ay, sir, we did sleep day out of countenance, and made the night light with drinking.

She's a most triumphant lady, if report be square to When she first met Mark Antony, she pursed up his heart, upon the river of Cydnus.

There she appeared indeed, or my reporter devised well for her.

From the barge A strange invisible perfume hits the sense Of the adjacent wharfs.

Royal wench! She made great Caesar lay his sword to bed: He plough'd her, and she cropp'd.

I saw her once Hop forty paces through the public street, And having lost her breath, she spoke, and panted, That she did make defect perfection, And, breathless, power breathe forth.

If beauty, wisdom, modesty, can settle The heart of Antony, Octavia is A blessed lottery to him.

Good Enobarbus, make yourself my guest Whilst you abide here.

The world and my great office will sometimes Divide me from your bosom.

All which time Before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers To them for you.

My Octavia, Read not my blemishes in the world's report: I have not kept my square, but that to come Shall all be done by the rule.

Get thee gone: Say to Ventidius I would speak with him: He shall to Parthia.

I will to Egypt: And though I make this marriage for my peace, I' the east my pleasure lies.

O, come, Ventidius, You must to Parthia: your commission's ready, Follow me, and receive't.

Trouble yourselves no further: pray you, hasten Your generals after.

Sir, Mark Antony Will e'en but kiss Octavia, and we'll follow.

Till I shall see you in your soldier's dress, Which will become you both, farewell.

We shall, As I conceive the journey, be at the Mount Before you, Lepidus.

Your way is shorter, My purposes do draw me much about: You'll win two days upon me.

Sir, good success! Give me some music, music, moody food Of us that trade in love.

The music, ho! Let it alone, let's to billiards: come, Charmian.

As well a woman with an eunuch play'd As with a woman.

Come, you'll play with me, sir? As well as I can, madam.

And when good will is show'd, though't come too short, The actor may plead pardon.

'Twas merry when You wager'd on your angling, when your diver Did hang a salt-fish on his hook, which he With fervency drew up.

O, from Italy Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears, That long time have been barren.

But, sirrah, mark, we use To say the dead are well: bring it to that, The gold I give thee will I melt and pour Down thy ill-uttering throat.

But yet, madam,-- I do not like 'But yet,' it does allay The good precedence, fie upon 'But yet'! 'But yet' is as a gaoler to bring forth Some monstrous malefactor.

Prithee, friend, Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear, The good and bad together: he's friends with Caesar: In state of health thou say'st, and thou say'st free.

Free, madam! no, I made no such report: He's bound unto Octavia.

The most infectious pestilence upon thee! Strikes him down Good madam, patience.

Gracious madam, I that do bring the news made not the match.

Good madam, keep yourself within yourself: The man is innocent.

Melt Egypt into Nile! and kindly creatures Turn all to serpents! Call the slave again: Though I am mad, I will not bite him: call.

These hands do lack nobility, that they strike A meaner than myself, since I myself Have given myself the cause.

Though it be honest, it is never good To bring bad news: give to a gracious message.

An host of tongues, but let ill tidings tell Themselves when they be felt.

Is he married? I cannot hate thee worser than I do, If thou again say 'Yes.

He is married? Take no offence that I would not offend you: To punish me for what you make me do.

Lead me from hence: I faint: O Iras, Charmian! 'tis no matter.

Go to the fellow, good Alexas, bid him Report the feature of Octavia, her years, Her inclination, let him not leave out The colour of her hair: bring me word quickly.

Let him for ever go:--let him not--Charmian, Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon, The other way's a Mars.

Bid you Alexas To MARDIAN Bring me word how tall she is.

Thou canst not fear us, Pompey, with thy sails, We'll speak with thee at sea: at land, thou know'st How much we do o'er-count thee.

At land, indeed, Thou dost o'er-count me of my father's house: But, since the cuckoo builds not for himself, Remain in't as thou mayst.

Be pleased to tell us-- For this is from the present--how you take The offers we have sent you.

Which do not be entreated to, but weigh What it is worth embraced.

I have heard it, Pompey, And am well studied for a liberal thanks Which I do owe you.

Let me have your hand: I did not think, sir, to have met you here.

The beds i' the east are soft, and thanks to you, That call'd me timelier than my purpose hither, For I have gain'd by 't.

Well, I know not What counts harsh fortune casts upon my face, But in my bosom shall she never come, To make my heart her vassal.

Thus we are agreed: I crave our composition may be written, And seal'd between us.

We'll feast each other ere we part, and let's Draw lots who shall begin.

No, Antony, take the lot: but, first Or last, your fine Egyptian cookery Shall have the fame.

I have heard that Julius Caesar Grew fat with feasting there.

Then so much have I heard: And I have heard, Apollodorus carried-- No more of that: he did so.

What, I pray you? A certain queen to Caesar in a mattress.

I know thee now: how farest thou, soldier? And well am like to do, for, I perceive, Four feasts are toward.

Let me shake thy hand, I never hated thee: I have seen thee fight, When I have envied thy behavior.

I never loved you much, but I ha' praised ye, When you have well deserved ten times as much As I have said you did.

Aboard my galley I invite you all: Will you lead, lords? Show us the way, sir.

I will praise any man that will praise me, though it cannot be denied what I have done by land.

Yes, something you can deny for your own safety: you have been a great thief by sea.

But give me your hand, Menas: if our eyes had authority, here they might take two thieves kissing.

All men's faces are true, whatsome'er their hands are.

For my part, I am sorry it is turned to a drinking.

We looked not for Mark Antony here: pray you, is he married to Cleopatra? Caesar's sister is called Octavia.

If I were bound to divine of this unity, I would not prophesy so.

I think the policy of that purpose made more in the marriage than the love of the parties.

But you shall find, the band that seems to tie their friendship together will be the very strangler of their amity: Octavia is of a holy, cold, and still conversation.

Who would not have his wife so? Not he that himself is not so, which is Mark Antony.

Antony will use his affection where it is: he married but his occasion here.

Come, sir, will you aboard? I have a health for you.

I shall take it, sir: we have used our throats in Egypt.

Enter two or three Servants with a banquet Here they'll be, man.

Some o' their plants are ill-rooted already: the least wind i' the world will blow them down.

As they pinch one another by the disposition, he cries out 'No more,' reconciles them to his entreaty, and himself to the drink.

But it raises the greater war between him and his discretion.

Why, this is to have a name in great men's fellowship: I had as lief have a reed that will do me no service as a partisan I could not heave.

To be called into a huge sphere, and not to be seen to move in't, are the holes where eyes should be, which pitifully disaster the cheeks.

Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your mud by the operation of your sun: so is your crocodile.

Sit,--and some wine! A health to Lepidus! I am not so well as I should be, but I'll ne'er out.

Not till you have slept, I fear me you'll be in till then.

Nay, certainly, I have heard the Ptolemies' pyramises are very goodly things, without contradiction, I have heard that.

what is't? thee, captain, And hear me speak a word.

And the tears of it are wet. Will this description satisfy him? With the health that Pompey gives him, else he is a very epicure.

Where's this cup I call'd for? wilt hear me, Rise from thy stool.

The matter? Rises, and walks aside I have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.

These quick-sands, Lepidus, Keep off them, for you sink.

Wilt thou be lord of all the world? What say'st thou? Wilt thou be lord of the whole world? That's twice.

How should that be? But entertain it, And, though thou think me poor, I am the man Will give thee all the world.

Hast thou drunk well? Now, Pompey, I have kept me from the cup.

Thou art, if thou darest be, the earthly Jove: Whate'er the ocean pales, or sky inclips, Is thine, if thou wilt ha't.

These three world-sharers, these competitors, Are in thy vessel: let me cut the cable, And, when we are put off, fall to their throats: All there is thine.

Ah, this thou shouldst have done, And not have spoke on't! In me 'tis villany, In thee't had been good service.

Thou must know, 'Tis not my profit that does lead mine honour, Mine honour, it.

Repent that e'er thy tongue Hath so betray'd thine act: being done unknown, I should have found it afterwards well done, But must condemn it now.

Desist, and drink. I'll never follow thy pall'd fortunes more.

Who seeks, and will not take when once 'tis offer'd, Shall never find it more.

I'll pledge it for him, Pompey. Here's to thee, Menas! Enobarbus, welcome! Fill till the cup be hid.

Strike the vessels, ho? Here is to Caesar! I could well forbear't.

It's monstrous labour, when I wash my brain, And it grows fouler.

Possess it, I'll make answer: But I had rather fast from all four days Than drink so much in one.

Ha, my brave emperor! To MARK ANTONY Shall we dance now the Egyptian Bacchanals, And celebrate our drink? Let's ha't, good soldier.

Come, let's all take hands, Till that the conquering wine hath steep'd our sense In soft and delicate Lethe.

Make battery to our ears with the loud music: The while I'll place you: then the boy shall sing, The holding every man shall bear as loud As his strong sides can volley.

DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS places them hand in hand THE SONG.

Good brother, Let me request you off: our graver business Frowns at this levity.

Gentle lords, let's part, You see we have burnt our cheeks: strong Enobarb Is weaker than the wine, and mine own tongue Splits what it speaks: the wild disguise hath almost Antick'd us all.

What needs more words? Good night. Good Antony, your hand.

O Antony, You have my father's house,--But, what? we are friends.

These drums! these trumpets, flutes! what! Let Neptune hear we bid a loud farewell To these great fellows: sound and be hang'd, sound out! Sound a flourish, with drums Ho! says a' There's my cap.

Now, darting Parthia, art thou struck, and now Pleased fortune does of Marcus Crassus' death Make me revenger.

Thy Pacorus, Orodes, Pays this for Marcus Crassus.

Who does i' the wars more than his captain can Becomes his captain's captain: and ambition, The soldier's virtue, rather makes choice of loss, Than gain which darkens him.

I could do more to do Antonius good, But 'twould offend him, and in his offence Should my performance perish.

Thou hast, Ventidius, Without the which a soldier, and his sword, Grants scarce distinction.

Where is he now? He purposeth to Athens: whither, with what haste The weight we must convey with's will permit, We shall appear before him.

On there, pass along! What, are the brothers parted? They have dispatch'd with Pompey, he is gone, The other three are sealing.

Octavia weeps To part from Rome, Caesar is sad, and Lepidus, Since Pompey's feast, as Menas says, is troubled With the green sickness.

A very fine one: O, how he loves Caesar! Nay, but how dearly he adores Mark Antony! Caesar? Why, he's the Jupiter of men.

Spake you of Caesar? How! the non-pareil! O Antony! O thou Arabian bird! Would you praise Caesar, say 'Caesar:' go no further.

Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.

But he loves Caesar best, yet he loves Antony: Ho! hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets, cannot Think, speak, cast, write, sing, number, ho! His love to Antony.

But as for Caesar, Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.

Adieu, noble Agrippa. Good fortune, worthy soldier, and farewell.

You take from me a great part of myself, Use me well in 't.

Sister, prove such a wife As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest band Shall pass on thy approof.

You shall not find, Though you be therein curious, the least cause For what you seem to fear: so, the gods keep you, And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends! We will here part.

Farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well: The elements be kind to thee, and make Thy spirits all of comfort! fare thee well.

My noble brother! The April 's in her eyes: it is love's spring, And these the showers to bring it on.

Be cheerful. Sir, look well to my husband's house, and-- What, Octavia? I'll tell you in your ear.

Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can Her heart inform her tongue,--the swan's That stands upon the swell at full of tide, And neither way inclines.

When Antony found Julius Caesar dead, He cried almost to roaring, and he wept When at Philippi he found Brutus slain.

troubled with a rheum, What willingly he did confound he wail'd, Believe't, till I wept too.

No, sweet Octavia, You shall hear from me still, the time shall not Out-go my thinking on you.

Come, sir, come, I'll wrestle with you in my strength of love: Look, here I have you, thus I let you go, And give you to the gods.

Adieu, be happy! Let all the number of the stars give light To thy fair way! Farewell, fa rewell! Kisses OCTAVIA Trumpets sound.

Good majesty, Herod of Jewry dare not look upon you But when you are well pleased.

That Herod's head I'll have: but how, when Antony is gone Through whom I might command it? Come thou near.

Most gracious majesty,-- Didst thou behold Octavia? Ay, dread queen.

Madam, in Rome, I look'd her in the face, and saw her led Between her brother and Mark Antony.

Didst hear her speak? is she shrill-tongued or low? Madam, I heard her speak, she is low-voiced.

I think so, Charmian: dull of tongue, and dwarfish! What majesty is in her gait? Remember, If e'er thou look'dst on majesty.

She creeps: Her motion and her station are as one, She shows a body rather than a life, A statue than a breather.

He's very knowing, I do perceive't: there's nothing in her yet: The fellow has good judgment.

Bear'st thou her face in mind? is't long or round? Round even to faultiness.

For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so.

Her hair, what colour? Brown, madam: and her forehead As low as she would wish it.

Thou must not take my former sharpness ill: I will employ thee back again, I find thee Most fit for business: go make thee ready, Our letters are prepared.

Indeed, he is so: I repent me much That so I harried him.

Why, methinks, by him, This creature's no such thing.

Hath he seen majesty? Isis else defend, And serving you so long! I have one thing more to ask him yet, good Charmian: But 'tis no matter, thou shalt bring him to me Where I will write.

O my good lord, Believe not all, or, if you must believe, Stomach not all.

Gentle Octavia, Let your best love draw to that point, which seeks Best to preserve it: if I lose mine honour, I lose myself: better I were not yours Than yours so branchless.

But, as you requested, Yourself shall go between 's: the mean time, lady, I'll raise the preparation of a war Shall stain your brother: make your soonest haste, So your desires are yours.

The Jove of power make me most weak, most weak, Your reconciler! Wars 'twixt you twain would be As if the world should cleave, and that slain men Should solder up the rift.

When it appears to you where this begins, Turn your displeasure that way: for our faults Can never be so equal, that your love Can equally move with them.

Provide your going, Choose your own company, and command what cost Your heart has mind to.

How now, friend Eros! There's strange news come, sir.

What, man? Caesar and Lepidus have made wars upon Pompey.

Then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps, no more, And throw between them all the food thou hast, They'll grind the one the other.

Where's Antony? He's walking in the garden--thus, and spurns The rush that lies before him, cries, 'Fool Lepidus!' And threats the throat of that his officer That murder'd Pompey.

More, Domitius, My lord desires you presently: my news I might have told hereafter.

Unto her He gave the stablishment of Egypt, made her Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia, Absolute queen.

This in the public eye? I' the common show-place, where they exercise.

His sons he there proclaim'd the kings of kings: Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia.

He gave to Alexander, to Ptolemy he assign'd Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia: she In the habiliments of the goddess Isis That day appear'd, and oft before gave audience, As 'tis reported, so.

Who, queasy with his insolence Already, will their good thoughts call from him.

The people know it, and have now received His accusations.

Hail, Caesar, and my lord! hail, most dear Caesar! That ever I should call thee castaway! You have not call'd me so, nor have you cause.

Good my lord, To come thus was I not constrain'd, but did On my free will.

My lord, Mark Antony, Hearing that you prepared for war, acquainted My grieved ear withal, whereon, I begg'd His pardon for return.

Which soon he granted, Being an obstruct 'tween his lust and him.

I have eyes upon him, And his affairs come to me on the wind.

No, my most wronged sister, Cleopatra Hath nodded him to her.

Cheer your heart, Be you not troubled with the time, which drives O'er your content these strong necessities, But let determined things to destiny Hold unbewail'd their way.

You are abused Beyond the mark of thought: and the high gods, To do you justice, make them ministers Of us and those that love you.

Each heart in Rome does love and pity you: Only the adulterous Antony, most large In his abominations, turns you off, And gives his potent regiment to a trull, That noises it against us.

Sister, welcome: pray you, Be ever known to patience: my dear'st sister! I will be even with thee, doubt it not.

But why, why, why? Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars, And say'st it is not fit.

What is't you say? Your presence needs must puzzle Antony, Take from his heart, take from his brain, from's time, What should not then be spared.

He is already Traduced for levity, and 'tis said in Rome That Photinus an eunuch and your maids Manage this war.

Sink Rome, and their tongues rot That speak against us! A charge we bear i' the war, And, as the president of my kingdom, will Appear there for a man.

A good rebuke, Which might have well becomed the best of men, To taunt at slackness.

By sea! what else? Why will my lord do so? For that he dares us to't.

Where Caesar fought with Pompey: but these offers, Which serve not for his vantage, be shakes off, And so should you.

Our overplus of shipping will we burn, And, with the rest full-mann'd, from the head of Actium Beat the approaching Caesar.

Thy business? The news is true, my lord, he is descried, Caesar has taken Toryne.

Can he be there in person? 'tis impossible, Strange that power should be.

Canidius, Our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land, And our twelve thousand horse.

Well, well: away! By Hercules, I think I am i' the right.

Soldier, thou art: but his whole action grows Not in the power on't: so our leader's led, And we are women's men.

You keep by land The legions and the horse whole, do you not? Marcus Octavius, Marcus Justeius, Publicola, and Caelius, are for sea: But we keep whole by land.

While he was yet in Rome, His power went out in such distractions as Beguiled all spies.

Who's his lieutenant, hear you? They say, one Taurus.

With news the time's with labour, and throes forth, Each minute, some.

My lord? Strike not by land, keep whole: provoke not battle, Till we have done at sea.

Do not exceed The prescript of this scroll: our fortune lies Upon this jump.

Set we our squadrons on yond side o' the hill, In eye of Caesar's battle, from which place We may the number of the ships behold, And so proceed accordingly.

CANIDIUS marcheth with his land army one way over  the stage, and TAURUS, the lieutenant of OCTAVIUS  CAESAR, the other way.

After their going in, is heard the noise of a sea-fight Alarum.

Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS Naught, naught all, naught! I can behold no longer: The Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral, With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder: To see't mine eyes are blasted.

Gods and goddesses, All the whole synod of them! What's thy passion! The greater cantle of the world is lost With very ignorance, we have kiss'd away Kingdoms and provinces.

How appears the fight? On our side like the token'd pestilence, Where death is sure.

That I beheld: Mine eyes did sicken at the sight, and could not Endure a further view.

Alack, alack! Our fortune on the sea is out of breath, And sinks most lamentably.

Had our general Been what he knew himself, it had gone well: O, he has given example for our flight, Most grossly, by his own! Ay, are you thereabouts? Why, then, good night indeed.

'Tis easy to't, and there I will attend What further comes.

To Caesar will I render My legions and my horse: six kings already Show me the way of yielding.

I'll yet follow The wounded chance of Antony, though my reason Sits in the wind against me.

I have fled myself, and have instructed cowards To run and show their shoulders.

Friends, be gone, I have myself resolved upon a course Which has no need of you, be gone: My treasure's in the harbour, take it.

O, I follow'd that I blush to look upon: My very hairs do mutiny, for the white Reprove the brown for rashness, and they them For fear and doting.

Friends, be gone: you shall Have letters from me to some friends that will Sweep your way for you.

Leave me, I pray, a little: pray you now: Nay, do so, for, indeed, I have lost command, Therefore I pray you: I'll see you by and by.

Go to him, madam, speak to him: He is unqualitied with very shame.

Well then, sustain him: O! Most noble sir, arise, the queen approaches: Her head's declined, and death will seize her, but Your comfort makes the rescue.

I have offended reputation, A most unnoble swerving.

O, whither hast thou led me, Egypt? See, How I convey my shame out of thine eyes By looking back what I have left behind 'Stroy'd in dishonour.

O my lord, my lord, Forgive my fearful sails! I little thought You would have follow'd.

O, my pardon! Now I must To the young man send humble treaties, dodge And palter in the shifts of lowness, who With half the bulk o' the world play'd as I pleased, Making and marring fortunes.

You did know How much you were my conqueror, and that My sword, made weak by my affection, would Obey it on all cause.

Pardon, pardon! Fall not a tear, I say, one of them rates All that is won and lost: give me a kiss, Even this repays me.

We sent our schoolmaster, Is he come back? Love, I am full of lead.

Some wine, within there, and our viands! Fortune knows We scorn her most when most she offers blows.

Know you him? Caesar, 'tis his schoolmaster: An argument that he is pluck'd, when hither He sends so poor a pinion off his wing, Which had superfluous kings for messengers Not many moons gone by.

Such as I am, I come from Antony: I was of late as petty to his ends As is the morn-dew on the myrtle-leaf To his grand sea.

Next, Cleopatra does confess thy greatness, Submits her to thy might, and of thee craves The circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs, Now hazarded to thy grace.

The queen Of audience nor desire shall fail, so she From Egypt drive her all-disgraced friend, Or take his life there: this if she perform, She shall not sue unheard.

So to them both. Fortune pursue thee! Bring him through the bands.

Observe how Antony becomes his flaw, And what thou think'st his very action speaks In every power that moves.

Is Antony or we in fault for this? Antony only, that would make his will Lord of his reason.

The queen shall then have courtesy, so she Will yield us up.

To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head, And he will fill thy wishes to the brim With principalities.

That he should dream, Knowing all measures, the full Caesar will Answer his emptiness! Caesar, thou hast subdued His judgment too.

What, no more ceremony? See, my women! Against the blown rose may they stop their nose That kneel'd unto the buds.

He needs as many, sir, as Caesar has, Or needs not us.

If Caesar please, our master Will leap to be his friend: for us, you know, Whose he is we are, and that is, Caesar's.

Thus then, thou most renown'd: Caesar entreats, Not to consider in what case thou stand'st, Further than he is Caesar.

He knows that you embrace not Antony As you did love, but as you fear'd him.

The scars upon your honour, therefore, he Does pity, as constrained blemishes, Not as deserved.

He is a god, and knows What is most right: mine honour was not yielded, But conquer'd merely.

Sir, sir, thou art so leaky, That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for Thy dearest quit thee.

Shall I say to Caesar What you require of him? for he partly begs To be desired to give.

Wisdom and fortune combating together, If that the former dare but what it can, No chance may shake it.

Your Caesar's father oft, When he hath mused of taking kingdoms in, Bestow'd his lips on that unworthy place, As it rain'd kisses.

Re-enter MARK ANTONY and DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS Favours, by Jove that thunders! What art thou, fellow? One that but performs The bidding of the fullest man, and worthiest To have command obey'd.

Mark Antony! Tug him away: being whipp'd, Bring him again: this Jack of Caesar's shall Bear us an errand to him.

Re-enter Attendants with THYREUS Is he whipp'd? Soundly, my lord.

Cried he? and begg'd a' pardon? He did ask favour.

Caesar sits down in Alexandria, where I will oppose his fate.

Our force by land Hath nobly held, our sever'd navy too Have knit again, and fleet, threatening most sea-like.

Come, Let's have one other gaudy night: call to me All my sad captains, fill our bowls once more, Let's mock the midnight bell.

It is my birth-day: I had thought to have held it poor: but, since my lord Is Antony again, I will be Cleopatra.

Do so, we'll speak to them, and to-night I'll force The wine peep through their scars.

The next time I do fight, I'll make death love me, for I will contend Even with his pestilent scythe.

Caesar must think, When one so great begins to rage, he's hunted Even to falling.

Give him no breath, but now Make boot of his distraction: never anger Made good guard for itself.

Let our best heads Know, that to-morrow the last of many battles We mean to fight: within our files there are, Of those that served Mark Antony but late, Enough to fetch him in.

See it done: And feast the army, we have store to do't, And they have earn'd the waste.

Why should he not? He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune, He is twenty men to one.

To-morrow, soldier, By sea and land I'll fight: or I will live, Or bathe my dying honour in the blood Shall make it live again.

Woo't thou fight well? I'll strike, and cry 'Take all.

Call forth my household servants: let's to-night Be bounteous at our meal.

Give me thy hand, Thou hast been rightly honest,--so hast thou,-- Thou,--and thou,--and thou:--you have served me well, And kings have been your fellows.

I wish I could be made so many men, And all of you clapp'd up together in An Antony, that I might do you service So good as you have done.

The gods forbid! Well, my good fellows, wait on me to-night: Scant not my cups, and make as much of me As when mine empire was your fellow too, And suffer'd my command.

Tend me to-night, May be it is the period of your duty: Haply you shall not see me more, or if, A mangled shadow: perchance to-morrow You'll serve another master.

Heard you of nothing strange about the streets? Nothing.

Good night, good night. They place themselves in every corner of the stage Here we: and if to-morrow Our navy thrive, I have an absolute hope Our landmen will stand up.

Music of the hautboys as under the stage Peace! what noise? List, list! Music i' the air.

It signs well, does it not? Peace, I say! What should this mean? 'Tis the god Hercules, whom Antony loved, Now leaves him.

'Tis strange. Eros! mine armour, Eros! Sleep a little.

Eros, come, mine armour, Eros! Come good fellow, put mine iron on: If fortune be not ours to-day, it is Because we brave her: come.

What's this for? Ah, let be, let be! thou art The armourer of my heart: false, false, this, this.

Seest thou, my good fellow? Go put on thy defences.

Is not this buckled well? Rarely, rarely: He that unbuckles this, till we do please To daff't for our repose, shall hear a storm.

Thou fumblest, Eros, and my queen's a squire More tight at this than thou: dispatch.

O love, That thou couldst see my wars to-day, and knew'st The royal occupation! thou shouldst see A workman in't.

Good morrow to thee, welcome: Thou look'st like him that knows a warlike charge: To business that we love we rise betime, And go to't with delight.

A thousand, sir, Early though't be, have on their riveted trim, And at the port expect you.

'Tis well blown, lads: This morning, like the spirit of a youth That means to be of note, begins betimes.

You that will fight, Follow me close, I'll bring you to't.

That he and Caesar might Determine this great war in single fight! Then Antony,--but now--Well, on.

Who's gone this morning? One ever near thee: call for Enobarbus, He shall not hear thee, or from Caesar's camp Say 'I am none of thine.

Go, Eros, send his treasure after, do it, Detain no jot, I charge thee: write to him-- I will subscribe--gentle adieus and greetings, Say that I wish he never find more cause To change a master.

O, my fortunes have Corrupted honest men! Dispatch.

Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, AGRIPPA, with DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, and others Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight: Our will is Antony be took alive, Make it so known.

The time of universal peace is near: Prove this a prosperous day, the three-nook'd world Shall bear the olive freely.

Go charge Agrippa Plant those that have revolted in the van, That Antony may seem to spend his fury Upon himself.

Alexas did revolt, and went to Jewry on Affairs of Antony, there did persuade Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar, And leave his master Antony: for this pains Caesar hath hang'd him.

Canidius and the rest That fell away have entertainment, but No honourable trust.

I have done ill, Of which I do accuse myself so sorely, That I will joy no more.

Enobarbus, Antony Hath after thee sent all thy treasure, with His bounty overplus: the messenger Came on my guard, and at thy tent is now Unloading of his mules.

I tell you true: best you safed the bringer Out of the host, I must attend mine office, Or would have done't myself.

I am alone the villain of the earth, And feel I am so most.

I fight against thee! No: I will go seek Some ditch wherein to die, the foul'st best fits My latter part of life.

Drums and trumpets. Enter AGRIPPA and others Retire, we have engaged ourselves too far: Caesar himself has work, and our oppression Exceeds what we expected.

Enter MARK ANTONY and SCARUS wounded O my brave emperor, this is fought indeed! Had we done so at first, we had droven them home With clouts about their heads.

I had a wound here that was like a T, But now 'tis made an H.

We'll beat 'em into bench-holes: I have yet Room for six scotches more.

They are beaten, sir, and our advantage serves For a fair victory.

Let us score their backs, And snatch 'em up, as we take hares, behind: 'Tis sport to maul a runner.

I will reward thee Once for thy spritely comfort, and ten-fold For thy good valour.

Enter MARK ANTONY, in a march, SCARUS, with others We have beat him to his camp: run one before, And let the queen know of our gests.

To-morrow, Before the sun shall see 's, we'll spill the blood That has to-day escaped.

I thank you all, For doughty-handed are you, and have fought Not as you served the cause, but as 't had been Each man's like mine, you have shown all Hectors.

Tell them your feats, whilst they with joyful tears Wash the congealment from your wounds, and kiss The honour'd gashes whole.

To SCARUS Give me thy hand To this great fairy I'll commend thy acts, Make her thanks bless thee.

What, girl! though grey Do something mingle with our younger brown, yet ha' we A brain that nourishes our nerves, and can Get goal for goal of youth.

Behold this man, Commend unto his lips thy favouring hand: Kiss it, my warrior: he hath fought to-day As if a god, in hate of mankind, had Destroy'd in such a shape.

I'll give thee, friend, An armour all of gold, it was a king's.

He has deserved it, were it carbuncled Like holy Phoebus' car.

Trumpeters, With brazen din blast you the city's ear, Make mingle with rattling tabourines, That heaven and earth may strike their sounds together, Applauding our approach.

Sentinels at their post If we be not relieved within this hour, We must return to the court of guard: the night Is shiny, and they say we shall embattle By the second hour i' the morn.

O, bear me witness, night,-- What man is this? Stand close, and list him.

Be witness to me, O thou blessed moon, When men revolted shall upon record Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did Before thy face repent! Hark further.

O Antony, Nobler than my revolt is infamous, Forgive me in thine own particular, But let the world rank me in register A master-leaver and a fugitive: O Antony! O Antony! Let's speak To him.

Let's hear him, for the things he speaks May concern Caesar.

But he sleeps. Swoons rather, for so bad a prayer as his Was never yet for sleep.

Drums afar off Hark! the drums Demurely wake the sleepers.

Let us bear him To the court of guard, he is of note: our hour Is fully out.

Their preparation is to-day by sea, We please them not by land.

I would they'ld fight i' the fire or i' the air, We'ld fight there too.

But being charged, we will be still by land, Which, as I take't, we shall, for his best force Is forth to man his galleys.

Yet they are not join'd: where yond pine does stand, I shall discover all: I'll bring thee word Straight, how 'tis like to go.

Swallows have built In Cleopatra's sails their nests: the augurers Say they know not, they cannot tell, look grimly, And dare not speak their knowledge.

Antony Is valiant, and dejected, and, by starts, His fretted fortunes give him hope, and fear, Of what he has, and has not.

Triple-turn'd whore! 'tis thou Hast sold me to this novice, and my heart Makes only wars on thee.

Bid them all fly, For when I am revenged upon my charm, I have done all.

Bid them all fly, begone. O sun, thy uprise shall I see no more: Fortune and Antony part here, even here Do we shake hands.

All come to this? The hearts That spaniel'd me at heels, to whom I gave Their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets On blossoming Caesar, and this pine is bark'd, That overtopp'd them all.

What, Eros, Eros! Ah, thou spell! Avaunt! Why is my lord enraged against his love? Vanish, or I shall give thee thy deserving, And blemish Caesar's triumph.

'Tis well thou'rt gone, If it be well to live, but better 'twere Thou fell'st into my fury, for one death Might have prevented many.

The witch shall die: To the young Roman boy she hath sold me, and I fall Under this plot, she dies for't.

Eros, ho! Help me, my women! O, he is more mad Than Telamon for his shield, the boar of Thessaly Was never so emboss'd.

To the monument! There lock yourself, and send him word you are dead.

The soul and body rive not more in parting Than greatness going off.

To the monument! Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself, Say, that the last I spoke was 'Antony,' And word it, prithee, piteously: hence, Mardian, And bring me how he takes my death.

To the monument! Eros, thou yet behold'st me? Ay, noble lord.

Ay, my lord, That which is now a horse, even with a thought The rack dislimns, and makes it indistinct, As water is in water.

My good knave Eros, now thy captain is Even such a body: here I am Antony: Yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave.

Nay, weep not, gentle Eros, there is left us Ourselves to end ourselves.

No, Antony, My mistress loved thee, and her fortunes mingled With thine entirely.

Hence, saucy eunuch, peace! She hath betray'd me and shall die the death.

Dead, then? Unarm, Eros, the long day's task is done, And we must sleep.

To MARDIAN That thou depart'st hence safe, Does pay thy labour richly, go.

Off, pluck off: The seven-fold shield of Ajax cannot keep The battery from my heart.

O, cleave, my sides! Heart, once be stronger than thy continent, Crack thy frail case! Apace, Eros, apace.

No more a soldier: bruised pieces, go, You have been nobly borne.

From me awhile. I will o'ertake thee, Cleopatra, and Weep for my pardon.

Come, Eros, Eros! Re-enter EROS What would my lord? Since Cleopatra died, I have lived in such dishonour, that the gods Detest my baseness.

Draw that thy honest sword, which thou hast worn Most useful for thy country.

O, sir, pardon me! When I did make thee free, sworest thou not then To do this when I bade thee? Do it at once, Or thy precedent services are all But accidents unpurposed.

Draw, and come. Turn from me, then, that noble countenance, Wherein the worship of the whole world lies.

Then let it do at once The thing why thou hast drawn it.

My dear master, My captain, and my emperor, let me say, Before I strike this bloody stroke, farewell.

Why, there then: thus I do escape the sorrow Of Antony's death.

Kills himself Thrice-nobler than myself! Thou teachest me, O valiant Eros, what I should, and thou couldst not.

My queen and Eros Have by their brave instruction got upon me A nobleness in record: but I will be A bridegroom in my death, and run into't As to a lover's bed.

Come, then, and, Eros, Thy master dies thy scholar: to do thus Falling on his sword I learn'd of thee.

How! not dead? not dead? The guard, ho! O, dispatch me! What's the noise? I have done my work in, friends: O, make an end Of what I have begun.

Alas, and woe! Let him that loves me strike me dead.

This sword but shown to Caesar, with this tidings, Shall enter me with him.

Lives he? Wilt thou not answer, man? Art thou there, Diomed? Draw thy sword, and give me Sufficing strokes for death.

Most absolute lord, My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.

What, ho, the emperor's guard! The guard, what, ho! Come, your lord calls! Bear me, good friends, where Cleopatra bides, 'Tis the last service that I shall command you.

Woe, woe are we, sir, you may not live to wear All your true followers out.

Most heavy day! Nay, good my fellows, do not please sharp fate To grace it with your sorrows: bid that welcome Which comes to punish us, and we punish it Seeming to bear it lightly.

Take me up: I have led you oft: carry me now, good friends, And have my thanks for all.

No, I will not: All strange and terrible events are welcome, But comforts we despise, our size of sorrow, Proportion'd to our cause, must be as great As that which makes it.

How now! is he dead? His death's upon him, but not dead.

Look out o' the other side your monument, His guard have brought him thither.

O sun, Burn the great sphere thou movest in! darkling stand The varying shore o' the world.

O Antony, Antony, Antony! Help, Charmian, help, Iras, help, Help, friends below, let's draw him hither.

Not Caesar's valour hath o'erthrown Antony, But Antony's hath triumph'd on itself.

But come, come, Antony,-- Help me, my women,--we must draw thee up: Assist, good friends.

A heavy sight! I am dying, Egypt, dying: Give me some wine, and let me speak a little.

No, let me speak, and let me rail so high, That the false housewife Fortune break her wheel, Provoked by my offence.

One word, sweet queen: Of Caesar seek your honour, with your safety.

Gentle, hear me: None about Caesar trust but Proculeius.

My resolution and my hands I'll trust, None about Caesar.

Noblest of men, woo't die? Hast thou no care of me? shall I abide In this dull world, which in thy absence is No better than a sty? O, see, my women, MARK ANTONY dies The crown o' the earth doth melt.

O, quietness, lady! She is dead too, our sovereign.

O madam, madam, madam! Royal Egypt, Empress! Peace, peace, Iras! No more, but e'en a woman, and commanded By such poor passion as the maid that milks And does the meanest chares.

It were for me To throw my sceptre at the injurious gods, To tell them that this world did equal theirs Till they had stol'n our jewel.

Come, away: This case of that huge spirit now is cold: Ah, women, women! come, we have no friend But resolution, and the briefest end.

Go to him, Dolabella, bid him yield, Being so frustrate, tell him he mocks The pauses that he makes.

If thou please To take me to thee, as I was to him I'll be to Caesar, if thou pleasest not, I yield thee up my life.

What is't thou say'st? I say, O Caesar, Antony is dead.

This is his sword, I robb'd his wound of it, behold it stain'd With his most noble blood.

Look you sad, friends? The gods rebuke me, but it is tidings To wash the eyes of kings.

And strange it is, That nature must compel us to lament Our most persisted deeds.

A rarer spirit never Did steer humanity: but you, gods, will give us Some faults to make us men.

Caesar is touch'd. When such a spacious mirror's set before him, He needs must see himself.

Hear me, good friends-- But I will tell you at some meeter season: The business of this man looks out of him, We'll hear him what he says.

The queen my mistress, Confined in all she has, her monument, Of thy intents desires instruction, That she preparedly may frame herself To the way she's forced to.

Bid her have good heart: She soon shall know of us, by some of ours, How honourable and how kindly we Determine for her, for Caesar cannot live To be ungentle.

So the gods preserve thee! Come hither, Proculeius.

Where's Dolabella, To second Proculeius? Let him alone, for I remember now How he's employ'd: he shall in time be ready.

Go with me to my tent, where you shall see How hardly I was drawn into this war, How calm and gentle I proceeded still In all my writings: go with me, and see What I can show in this.

Caesar sends greeting to the Queen of Egypt, And bids thee study on what fair demands Thou mean'st to have him grant thee.

Did tell me of you, bade me trust you, but I do not greatly care to be deceived, That have no use for trusting.

Pray you, tell him I am his fortune's vassal, and I send him The greatness he has got.

I hourly learn A doctrine of obedience, and would gladly Look him i' the face.

Have comfort, for I know your plight is pitied Of him that caused it.

You see how easily she may be surprised: Here PROCULEIUS and two of the Guard ascend the  monument by a ladder placed against a window, and,  having descended, come behind CLEOPATRA.

Some of the Guard unbar and open the gates To PROCULEIUS and the Guard Guard her till Caesar come.

Royal queen! O Cleopatra! thou art taken, queen: Quick, quick, good hands.

Drawing a dagger Hold, worthy lady, hold: Seizes and disarms her Do not yourself such wrong, who are in this Relieved, but not betray'd.

What, of death too, That rids our dogs of languish? Do not abuse my master's bounty by The undoing of yourself: let the world see His nobleness well acted, which your death Will never let come forth.

Know, sir, that I Will not wait pinion'd at your master's court, Nor once be chastised with the sober eye Of dull Octavia.

What thou hast done thy master Caesar knows, And he hath sent for thee: for the queen, I'll take her to my guard.

So, Dolabella, It shall content me best: be gentle to her.

To CLEOPATRA To Caesar I will speak what you shall please, If you'll employ me to him.

Most noble empress, you have heard of me? I cannot tell.

You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams, Is't not your trick? I understand not, madam.

Think you there was, or might be, such a man As this I dream'd of? Gentle madam, no.

I thank you, sir, Know you what Caesar means to do with me? I am loath to tell you what I would you knew.

Nay, pray you, sir,-- Though he be honourable,-- He'll lead me, then, in triumph? Madam, he will, I know't.

Flourish, and shout within, 'Make way there: Octavius Caesar!' Which is the Queen of Egypt? It is the emperor, madam.

CLEOPATRA kneels Arise, you shall not kneel: I pray you, rise, rise, Egypt.

Sir, the gods Will have it thus, my master and my lord I must obey.

Take to you no hard thoughts: The record of what injuries you did us, Though written in our flesh, we shall remember As things but done by chance.

Sole sir o' the world, I cannot project mine own cause so well To make it clear, but do confess I have Been laden with like frailties which before Have often shamed our sex.

I'll take my leave. And may, through all the world: 'tis yours, and we, Your scutcheons and your signs of conquest, shall Hang in what place you please.

Here, my good lord. You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.

This is the brief of money, plate, and jewels, I am possess'd of: 'tis exactly valued, Not petty things admitted.

This is my treasurer: let him speak, my lord, Upon his peril, that I have reserved To myself nothing.

Speak the truth, Seleucus. I had rather seal my lips, than, to my peril, Speak that which is not.

What have I kept back? Enough to purchase what you have made known.

Nay, blush not, Cleopatra, I approve Your wisdom in the deed.

See, Caesar! O, behold, How pomp is follow'd! mine will now be yours, And, should we shift estates, yours would be mine.

To SELEUCUS Prithee, go hence, Or I shall show the cinders of my spirits Through the ashes of my chance: wert thou a man, Thou wouldst have mercy on me.

Be it known, that we, the greatest, are misthought For things that others do, and, when we fall, We answer others' merits in our name, Are therefore to be pitied.

Therefore be cheer'd, Make not your thoughts your prisons: no, dear queen, For we intend so to dispose you as Yourself shall give us counsel.

Feed, and sleep: Our care and pity is so much upon you, That we remain your friend, and so, adieu.

Exeunt OCTAVIUS CAESAR and his train He words me, girls, he words me, that I should not Be noble to myself: but, hark thee, Charmian.

Whispers CHARMIAN Finish, good lady, the bright day is done, And we are for the dark.

Hie thee again: I have spoke already, and it is provided, Go put it to the haste.

Re-enter DOLABELLA Where is the queen? Behold, sir.

I your servant, Adieu, good queen, I must attend on Caesar.

I'll never see 't, for, I am sure, my nails Are stronger than mine eyes.

Why, that's the way To fool their preparation, and to conquer Their most absurd intents.

Re-enter CHARMIAN Now, Charmian! Show me, my women, like a queen: go fetch My best attires: I am again for Cydnus, To meet Mark Antony: sirrah Iras, go.

Now, noble Charmian, we'll dispatch indeed, And, when thou hast done this chare, I'll give thee leave To play till doomsday.

Bring our crown and all. Wherefore's this noise? Here is a rural fellow That will not be denied your highness presence: He brings you figs.

What poor an instrument May do a noble deed! he brings me liberty.

My resolution's placed, and I have nothing Of woman in me: now from head to foot I am marble-constant, now the fleeting moon No planet is of mine.

Re-enter Guardsman, with Clown bringing in a basket This is the man.

Rememberest thou any that have died on't? Very many, men and women too.

Setting down his basket You must think this, look you, that the worm will do his kind.

Look you, the worm is not to be trusted but in the keeping of wise people, for, indeed, there is no goodness in worm.

Give it nothing, I pray you, for it is not worth the feeding.

Will it eat me? You must not think I am so simple but I know the devil himself will not eat a woman: I know that a woman is a dish for the gods, if the devil dress her not.

But, truly, these same whoreson devils do the gods great harm in their women, for in every ten that they make, the devils mar five.

Re-enter IRAS with a robe, crown,  and c Give me my robe, put on my crown, I have Immortal longings in me: now no more The juice of Egypt's grape shall moist this lip: Yare, yare, good Iras, quick.

So, have you done? Come then, and take the last warmth of my lips.

IRAS falls and dies Have I the aspic in my lips? Dost fall? If thou and nature can so gently part, The stroke of death is as a lover's pinch, Which hurts, and is desired.

Dost thou lie still? If thus thou vanishest, thou tell'st the world It is not worth leave-taking.

Come, thou mortal wretch, To an asp, which she applies to her breast With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate Of life at once untie: poor venomous fool Be angry, and dispatch.

Applying another asp to her arm What should I stay-- In this vile world? So, fare thee well.

Now boast thee, death, in thy possession lies A lass unparallel'd.

Downy windows, close, And golden Phoebus never be beheld Of eyes again so royal! Your crown's awry, I'll mend it, and then play.

Applies an asp O, come apace, dispatch! I partly feel thee.

What work is here! Charmian, is this well done? It is well done, and fitting for a princess Descended of so many royal kings.

Ah, soldier! Re-enter DOLABELLA How goes it here? All dead.

Caesar, thy thoughts Touch their effects in this: thyself art coming To see perform'd the dreaded act which thou So sought'st to hinder.

Within  'A way there, a way for Caesar!' Re-enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR and all his train marching O sir, you are too sure an augurer, That you did fear is done.

Bravest at the last, She levell'd at our purposes, and, being royal, Took her own way.

The manner of their deaths? I do not see them bleed.

Who was last with them? A simple countryman, that brought her figs: This was his basket.

O Caesar, This Charmian lived but now, she stood and spake: I found her trimming up the diadem On her dead mistress, tremblingly she stood And on the sudden dropp'd.

O noble weakness! If they had swallow'd poison, 'twould appear By external swelling: but she looks like sleep, As she would catch another Antony In her strong toil of grace.

Here, on her breast, There is a vent of blood and something blown: The like is on her arm.

This is an aspic's trail: and these fig-leaves Have slime upon them, such as the aspic leaves Upon the caves of Nile.

Most probable That so she died, for her physician tells me She hath pursued conclusions infinite Of easy ways to die.

Take up her bed, And bear her women from the monument: She shall be buried by her Antony: No grave upon the earth shall clip in it A pair so famous.

High events as these Strike those that make them, and their story is No less in pity than his glory which Brought them to be lamented.

Our army shall In solemn show attend this funeral, And then to Rome.

Come, Dolabella, see High order in this great solemnity.

Proceed, Solinus, to procure my fall And by the doom of death end woes and all.

Thy substance, valued at the highest rate, Cannot amount unto a hundred marks, Therefore by law thou art condemned to die.

Yet this my comfort: when your words are done, My woes end likewise with the evening sun.

Well, Syracusian, say in brief the cause Why thou departed'st from thy native home And for what cause thou camest to Ephesus.

In Syracusa was I born, and wed Unto a woman, happy but for me, And by me, had not our hap been bad.

There had she not been long, but she became A joyful mother of two goodly sons, And, which was strange, the one so like the other, As could not be distinguish'd but by names.

My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys, Made daily motions for our home return: Unwilling I agreed.

Nay, forward, old man, do not break off so, For we may pity, though not pardon thee.

Thus have you heard me sever'd from my bliss, That by misfortunes was my life prolong'd, To tell sad stories of my own mishaps.

And for the sake of them thou sorrowest for, Do me the favour to dilate at full What hath befall'n of them and thee till now.

But here must end the story of my life, And happy were I in my timely death, Could all my travels warrant me they live.

But, though thou art adjudged to the death And passed sentence may not be recall'd But to our honour's great disparagement, Yet I will favour thee in what I can.

Hopeless and helpless doth AEgeon wend, But to procrastinate his lifeless end.

Therefore give out you are of Epidamnum, Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate.

This very day a Syracusian merchant Is apprehended for arrival here, And not being able to buy out his life According to the statute of the town, Dies ere the weary sun set in the west.

Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host, And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee.

Many a man would take you at your word, And go indeed, having so good a mean.

A trusty villain, sir, that very oft, When I am dull with care and melancholy, Lightens my humour with his merry jests.

What, will you walk with me about the town, And then go to my inn and dine with me? I am invited, sir, to certain merchants, Of whom I hope to make much benefit, I crave your pardon.

Soon at five o'clock, Please you, I'll meet with you upon the mart And afterward consort you till bed-time: My present business calls me from you now.

Farewell till then: I will go lose myself And wander up and down to view the city.

He that commends me to mine own content Commends me to the thing I cannot get.

Methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock, And strike you home without a messenger.

Come, Dromio, come, these jests are out of season, Reserve them till a merrier hour than this.

Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee? To me, sir? why, you gave no gold to me.

Come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness, And tell me how thou hast disposed thy charge.

My charge was but to fetch you from the mart Home to your house, the Phoenix, sir, to dinner: My mistress and her sister stays for you.

If I should pay your worship those again, Perchance you will not bear them patiently.

Thy mistress' marks? what mistress, slave, hast thou? Your worship's wife, my mistress at the Phoenix, She that doth fast till you come home to dinner, And prays that you will hie you home to dinner.

What, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face, Being forbid? There, take you that, sir knave.

What mean you, sir? for God's sake, hold your hands! Nay, and you will not, sir, I'll take my heels.

Upon my life, by some device or other The villain is o'er-raught of all my money.

I'll to the Centaur, to go seek this slave: I greatly fear my money is not safe.

Neither my husband nor the slave return'd, That in such haste I sent to seek his master! Sure, Luciana, it is two o'clock.

Perhaps some merchant hath invited him, And from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner.

Good sister, let us dine and never fret: A man is master of his liberty: Time is their master, and, when they see time, They'll go or come: if so, be patient, sister.

Why should their liberty than ours be more? Because their business still lies out o' door.

How if your husband start some other where? Till he come home again, I would forbear.

Patience unmoved! no marvel though she pause, They can be meek that have no other cause.

Say, is your tardy master now at hand? Nay, he's at two hands with me, and that my two ears can witness.

Say, didst thou speak with him? know'st thou his mind? Ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear: Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it.

Spake he so doubtfully, thou couldst not feel his meaning? Nay, he struck so plainly, I could too well feel his blows, and withal so doubtfully that I could scarce understand them.

But say, I prithee, is he coming home? It seems he hath great care to please his wife.

Horn-mad, thou villain! I mean not cuckold-mad, But, sure, he is stark mad.

So that my errand, due unto my tongue, I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders, For, in conclusion, he did beat me there.

Go back again, and be new beaten home? For God's sake, send some other messenger.

And he will bless that cross with other beating: Between you I shall have a holy head.

Am I so round with you as you with me, That like a football you do spurn me thus? You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither: If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.

Fie, how impatience loureth in your face! His company must do his minions grace, Whilst I at home starve for a merry look.

My decayed fair A sunny look of his would soon repair But, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale And feeds from home, poor I am but his stale.

Self-harming jealousy! fie, beat it hence! Unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense.

Since that my beauty cannot please his eye, I'll weep what's left away, and weeping die.

How many fond fools serve mad jealousy! The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up Safe at the Centaur, and the heedful slave Is wander'd forth, in care to seek me out By computation and mine host's report.

I could not speak with Dromio since at first I sent him from the mart.

See, here he comes. How now sir! is your merry humour alter'd? As you love strokes, so jest with me again.

I did not see you since you sent me hence, Home to the Centaur, with the gold you gave me.

Villain, thou didst deny the gold's receipt, And told'st me of a mistress and a dinner, For which, I hope, thou felt'st I was displeased.

I am glad to see you in this merry vein: What means this jest? I pray you, master, tell me.

Yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth? Think'st thou I jest? Hold, take thou that, and that.

When the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport, But creep in crannies when he hides his beams.

If you will jest with me, know my aspect, And fashion your demeanor to my looks, Or I will beat this method in your sconce.

But, I pray, sir why am I beaten? Dost thou not know? Nothing, sir, but that I am beaten.

Shall I tell you why? Ay, sir, and wherefore, for they say every why hath a wherefore.

Why, first,--for flouting me, and then, wherefore-- For urging it the second time to me.

Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season, When in the why and the wherefore is neither rhyme nor reason? Well, sir, I thank you.

Thank me, sir, for what? Marry, sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.

I'll make you amends next, to give you nothing for something.

But say, sir, is it dinner-time? No, sir, I think the meat wants that I have.

In good time, sir, what's that? Well, sir, then 'twill be dry.

Your reason? Lest it make you choleric and purchase me another dry basting.

Well, sir, learn to jest in good time: there's a time for all things.

I durst have denied that, before you were so choleric.

By what rule, sir? Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald pate of father Time himself.

There's no time for a man to recover his hair that grows bald by nature.

May he not do it by fine and recovery? Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig and recover the lost hair of another man.

Why is Time such a niggard of hair, being, as it is, so plentiful an excrement? Because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts, and what he hath scanted men in hair he hath given them in wit.

Why, but there's many a man hath more hair than wit.

Not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair.

Why, thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit.

The plainer dealer, the sooner lost: yet he loseth it in a kind of jollity.

The one, to save the money that he spends in trimming, the other, that at dinner they should not drop in his porridge.

You would all this time have proved there is no time for all things.

Marry, and did, sir, namely, no time to recover hair lost by nature.

But your reason was not substantial, why there is no time to recover.

Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald and therefore to the world's end will have bald followers.

I knew 'twould be a bald conclusion: But, soft! who wafts us yonder? Ay, ay, Antipholus, look strange and frown: Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects, I am not Adriana nor thy wife.

I am possess'd with an adulterate blot, My blood is mingled with the crime of lust: For if we too be one and thou play false, I do digest the poison of thy flesh, Being strumpeted by thy contagion.

Keep then far league and truce with thy true bed, I live unstain'd, thou undishonoured.

Fie, brother! how the world is changed with you! When were you wont to use my sister thus? She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.

By Dromio? By me? By thee, and this thou didst return from him, That he did buffet thee, and, in his blows, Denied my house for his, me for his wife.

Did you converse, sir, with this gentlewoman? What is the course and drift of your compact? I, sir? I never saw her till this time.

Villain, thou liest, for even her very words Didst thou deliver to me on the mart.

How can she thus then call us by our names, Unless it be by inspiration.

This is the fairy land: O spite of spites! We talk with goblins, owls and sprites: If we obey them not, this will ensue, They'll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.

Why pratest thou to thyself and answer'st not? Dromio, thou drone, thou snail, thou slug, thou sot! I am transformed, master, am I not? I think thou art in mind, and so am I.

'Tis so, I am an ass, else it could never be But I should know her as well as she knows me.

Come, come, no longer will I be a fool, To put the finger in the eye and weep, Whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn.

Dromio, keep the gate. Husband, I'll dine above with you to-day And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks.

Sirrah, if any ask you for your master, Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter.

Master, shall I be porter at the gate? Ay, and let none enter, lest I break your pate.

But here's a villain that would face me down He met me on the mart, and that I beat him, And charged him with a thousand marks in gold, And that I did deny my wife and house.

Marry, so it doth appear By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear.

I should kick, being kick'd, and, being at that pass, You would keep from my heels and beware of an ass.

You're sad, Signior Balthazar: pray God our cheer May answer my good will and your good welcome here.

I hold your dainties cheap, sir, and your welcome dear.

O, Signior Balthazar, either at flesh or fish, A table full of welcome make scarce one dainty dish.

Good meat, sir, is common, that every churl affords.

And welcome more common, for that's nothing but words.

Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast.

Ay, to a niggardly host, and more sparing guest: But though my cates be mean, take them in good part, Better cheer may you have, but not with better heart.

Go bid them let us in. Maud, Bridget, Marian, Cicel, Gillian, Ginn! idiot, patch! Either get thee from the door, or sit down at the hatch.

Dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou call'st for such store, When one is one too many? Go, get thee from the door.

What patch is made our porter? My master stays in the street.

Who talks within there? ho, open the door! me wherefore.

Wherefore? for my dinner: I have not dined to-day.

What art thou that keepest me out from the house I owe? is Dromio.

O villain! thou hast stolen both mine office and my name.

The one ne'er got me credit, the other mickle blame.

If thou hadst been Dromio to-day in my place, Thou wouldst have changed thy face for a name or thy name for an ass.

O Lord, I must laugh! Have at you with a proverb--Shall I set in my staff? can you tell? answered him well.

Do you hear, you minion? you'll let us in, I hope? OF EPHESUS So, come, help: well struck! there was blow for blow.

You'll cry for this, minion, if I beat the door down.

If you went in pain, master, this 'knave' would go sore.

Here is neither cheer, sir, nor welcome: we would fain have either.

In debating which was best, we shall part with neither.

They stand at the door, master, bid them welcome hither.

There is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.

You would say so, master, if your garments were thin.

Your cake there is warm within, you stand here in the cold: It would make a man mad as a buck, to be so bought and sold.

A man may break a word with you, sir, and words are but wind, Ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.

thee, hind! Here's too much 'out upon thee!' I pray thee, let me in.

A crow without feather? Master, mean you so? For a fish without a fin, there's a fowl without a feather, If a crow help us in, sirrah, we'll pluck a crow together.

Have patience, sir, O, let it not be so! Herein you war against your reputation And draw within the compass of suspect The unviolated honour of your wife.

Be ruled by me: depart in patience, And let us to the Tiger all to dinner, And about evening come yourself alone To know the reason of this strange restraint.

You have prevailed: I will depart in quiet, And, in despite of mirth, mean to be merry.

I know a wench of excellent discourse, Pretty and witty, wild, and yet, too, gentle: There will we dine.

This woman that I mean, My wife--but, I protest, without desert-- Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal: To her will we to dinner.

Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me, I'll knock elsewhere, to see if they'll disdain me.

This jest shall cost me some expense. And may it be that you have quite forgot A husband's office? shall, Antipholus.

Alas, poor women! make us but believe, Being compact of credit, that you love us, Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve, We in your motion turn and you may move us.

Then, gentle brother, get you in again, Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife: 'Tis holy sport to be a little vain, When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.

Sweet mistress--what your name is else, I know not, Nor by what wonder you do hit of mine,-- Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not Than our earth's wonder, more than earth divine.

Teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak, Lay open to my earthy-gross conceit, Smother'd in errors, feeble, shallow, weak, The folded meaning of your words' deceit.

Against my soul's pure truth why labour you To make it wander in an unknown field? Are you a god? would you create me new? Transform me then, and to your power I'll yield.

But if that I am I, then well I know Your weeping sister is no wife of mine, Nor to her bed no homage do I owe Far more, far more to you do I decline.

Gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.

It is thyself, mine own self's better part, Mine eye's clear eye, my dear heart's dearer heart, My food, my fortune and my sweet hope's aim, My sole earth's heaven and my heaven's claim.

Thee will I love and with thee lead my life: Thou hast no husband yet nor I no wife.

O, soft, air! hold you still: I'll fetch my sister, to get her good will.

Why, how now, Dromio! where runn'st thou so fast? Do you know me, sir? am I Dromio? am I your man? am I myself? Thou art Dromio, thou art my man, thou art thyself.

I am an ass, I am a woman's man and besides myself.

What woman's man? and how besides thyself? besides thyself? Marry, sir, besides myself, I am due to a woman, one that claims me, one that haunts me, one that will have me.

What is she? A very reverent body, ay, such a one as a man may not speak of without he say 'Sir-reverence.

I have but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a wondrous fat marriage.

How dost thou mean a fat marriage? Marry, sir, she's the kitchen wench and all grease, and I know not what use to put her to but to make a lamp of her and run from her by her own light.

I warrant, her rags and the tallow in them will burn a Poland winter: if she lives till doomsday, she'll burn a week longer than the whole world.

What complexion is she of? Swart, like my shoe, but her face nothing half so clean kept: for why, she sweats, a man may go over shoes in the grime of it.

No, sir, 'tis in grain, Noah's flood could not do it.

What's her name? Nell, sir, but her name and three quarters, that's an ell and three quarters, will not measure her from hip to hip.

Then she bears some breadth? No longer from head to foot than from hip to hip: she is spherical, like a globe, I could find out countries in her.

In what part of her body stands Ireland? Marry, in her buttocks: I found it out by the bogs.

Where Scotland? I found it by the barrenness, hard in the palm of the hand.

Where France? In her forehead, armed and reverted, making war against her heir.

Where England? I looked for the chalky cliffs, but I could find no whiteness in them, but I guess it stood in her chin, by the salt rheum that ran between France and it.

Where Spain? Faith, I saw it not, but I felt it hot in her breath.

Where stood Belgia, the Netherlands? Oh, sir, I did not look so low.

If every one knows us and we know none, 'Tis time, I think, to trudge, pack and be gone.

As from a bear a man would run for life, So fly I from her that would be my wife.

There's none but witches do inhabit here, And therefore 'tis high time that I were hence.

She that doth call me husband, even my soul Doth for a wife abhor.

I thought to have ta'en you at the Porpentine: The chain unfinish'd made me stay thus long.

What is your will that I shall do with this? What please yourself, sir: I have made it for you.

Go home with it and please your wife withal, And soon at supper-time I'll visit you And then receive my money for the chain.

I pray you, sir, receive the money now, For fear you ne'er see chain nor money more.

What I should think of this, I cannot tell: But this I think, there's no man is so vain That would refuse so fair an offer'd chain.

I see a man here needs not live by shifts, When in the streets he meets such golden gifts.

I'll to the mart, and there for Dromio stay If any ship put out, then straight away.

Even just the sum that I do owe to you Is growing to me by Antipholus, And in the instant that I met with you He had of me a chain: at five o'clock I shall receive the money for the same.

Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house, I will discharge my bond and thank you too.

While I go to the goldsmith's house, go thou And buy a rope's end: that will I bestow Among my wife and her confederates, For locking me out of my doors by day.

Get thee gone, Buy thou a rope and bring it home to me.

A man is well holp up that trusts to you: I promised your presence and the chain, But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me.

Belike you thought our love would last too long, If it were chain'd together, and therefore came not.

Saving your merry humour, here's the note How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat, The fineness of the gold and chargeful fashion.

Which doth amount to three odd ducats more Than I stand debted to this gentleman: I pray you, see him presently discharged, For he is bound to sea and stays but for it.

I am not furnish'd with the present money, Besides, I have some business in the town.

Good signior, take the stranger to my house And with you take the chain and bid my wife Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof: Perchance I will be there as soon as you.

Then you will bring the chain to her yourself? No, bear it with you, lest I come not time enough.

Have you the chain about you? An if I have not, sir, I hope you have, Or else you may return without your money.

Nay, come, I pray you, sir, give me the chain: Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman, And I, to blame, have held him here too long.

Good Lord! you use this dalliance to excuse Your breach of promise to the Porpentine.

I should have chid you for not bringing it, But, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.

You hear how he importunes me,--the chain! Why, give it to my wife and fetch your money.

Fie, now you run this humour out of breath, where's the chain? I pray you, let me see it.

Good sir, say whether you'll answer me or no: If not, I'll leave him to the officer.

I answer you! what should I answer you? The money that you owe me for the chain.

You wrong me more, sir, in denying it: Consider how it stands upon my credit.

I do, and charge you in the duke's name to obey me.

Either consent to pay this sum for me Or I attach you by this officer.

Consent to pay thee that I never had! Arrest me, foolish fellow, if thou darest.

Here is thy fee, arrest him, officer, I would not spare my brother in this case, If he should scorn me so apparently.

But, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear As all the metal in your shop will answer.

Sir, sir, I will have law in Ephesus, To your notorious shame, I doubt it not.

Master, there is a bark of Epidamnum That stays but till her owner comes aboard, And then, sir, she bears away.

Our fraughtage, sir, I have convey'd aboard, and I have bought The oil, the balsamum and aqua-vitae.

The ship is in her trim, the merry wind Blows fair from land: they stay for nought at all But for their owner, master, and yourself.

How now! a madman! Why, thou peevish sheep, What ship of Epidamnum stays for me? A ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.

Thou drunken slave, I sent thee for a rope, And told thee to what purpose and what end.

You sent me for a rope's end as soon: You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.

I will debate this matter at more leisure And teach your ears to list me with more heed.

To Adriana! that is where we dined, Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband: She is too big, I hope, for me to compass.

Thither I must, although against my will, For servants must their masters' minds fulfil.

And what said he? That love I begg'd for you he begg'd of me.

With what persuasion did he tempt thy love? With words that in an honest suit might move.

I cannot, nor I will not, hold me still, My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will.

He is deformed, crooked, old and sere, Ill-faced, worse bodied, shapeless everywhere, Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind, Stigmatical in making, worse in mind.

Who would be jealous then of such a one? No evil lost is wail'd when it is gone.

Ah, but I think him better than I say, And yet would herein others' eyes were worse.

Far from her nest the lapwing cries away: My heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse.

Here! go, the desk, the purse! sweet, now, make haste.

Where is thy master, Dromio? is he well? No, he's in Tartar limbo, worse than hell.

Why, man, what is the matter? I do not know the matter: he is 'rested on the case.

I know not at whose suit he is arrested well, But he's in a suit of buff which 'rested him, that can I tell.

Will you send him, mistress, redemption, the money in his desk? Go fetch it, sister.

This I wonder at, That he, unknown to me, should be in debt.

O, yes, if any hour meet a sergeant, a' turns back for very fear.

As if Time were in debt! how fondly dost thou reason! Time is a very bankrupt, and owes more than he's worth, to season.

Come, sister: I am press'd down with conceit-- Conceit, my comfort and my injury.

There's not a man I meet but doth salute me As if I were their well-acquainted friend, And every one doth call me by my name.

Sure, these are but imaginary wiles And Lapland sorcerers inhabit here.

Is there any Why, sir, I brought you word an hour since that the bark Expedition put forth to-night, and then were you hindered by the sergeant, to tarry for the hoy Delay.

Here are the angels that you sent for to deliver you.

The fellow is distract, and so am I, And here we wander in illusions: Some blessed power deliver us from hence! Well met, well met, Master Antipholus.

I see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now: Is that the chain you promised me to-day? Satan, avoid! I charge thee, tempt me not.

Nay, she is worse, she is the devil's dam, and here she comes in the habit of a light wench: and thereof comes that the wenches say 'God damn me,' that's as much to say 'God make me a light wench.

It is written, they appear to men like angels of light: light is an effect of fire, and fire will burn, ergo, light wenches will burn.

Come not near her. Your man and you are marvellous merry, sir.

Will you go with me? We'll mend our dinner here? Master, if you do, expect spoon-meat, or bespeak a long spoon.

Why, Dromio? Marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with the devil.

Avoid then, fiend! what tell'st thou me of supping? Thou art, as you are all, a sorceress: I conjure thee to leave me and be gone.

Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner, Or, for my diamond, the chain you promised, And I'll be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

Some devils ask but the parings of one's nail, A rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin, A nut, a cherry-stone, But she, more covetous, would have a chain.

Master, be wise: an if you give it her, The devil will shake her chain and fright us with it.

I pray you, sir, my ring, or else the chain: I hope you do not mean to cheat me so.

'Fly pride,' says the peacock: mistress, that you know.

Now, out of doubt Antipholus is mad, Else would he never so demean himself.

A ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats, And for the same he promised me a chain: Both one and other he denies me now.

The reason that I gather he is mad, Besides this present instance of his rage, Is a mad tale he told to-day at dinner, Of his own doors being shut against his entrance.

Belike his wife, acquainted with his fits, On purpose shut the doors against his way.

My way is now to hie home to his house, And tell his wife that, being lunatic, He rush'd into my house and took perforce My ring away.

This course I fittest choose, For forty ducats is too much to lose.

Fear me not, man, I will not break away: I'll give thee, ere I leave thee, so much money, To warrant thee, as I am 'rested for.

My wife is in a wayward mood to-day, And will not lightly trust the messenger That I should be attach'd in Ephesus, I tell you, 'twill sound harshly in her ears.

How now, sir! have you that I sent you for? Here's that, I warrant you, will pay them all.

But where's the money? Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.

Five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope? I'll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.

To what end did I bid thee hie thee home? To a rope's-end, sir, and to that end am I returned.

Nay, 'tis for me to be patient, I am in adversity.

Thou whoreson, senseless villain! I would I were senseless, sir, that I might not feel your blows.

Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an I am an ass, indeed, you may prove it by my long ears.

I have served him from the hour of my nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his hands for my service but blows.

Good Doctor Pinch, you are a conjurer, Establish him in his true sense again, And I will please you what you will demand.

Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks! Mark how he trembles in his ecstasy! Give me your hand and let me feel your pulse.

Were not my doors lock'd up and I shut out? Perdie, your doors were lock'd and you shut out.

And did not she herself revile me there? Sans fable, she herself reviled you there.

Did not her kitchen-maid rail, taunt, and scorn me? Certes, she did, the kitchen-vestal scorn'd you.

And did not I in rage depart from thence? In verity you did, my bones bear witness, That since have felt the vigour of his rage.

Is't good to soothe him in these contraries? It is no shame: the fellow finds his vein, And yielding to him humours well his frenzy.

Alas, I sent you money to redeem you, By Dromio here, who came in haste for it.

Money by me! heart and goodwill you might, But surely master, not a rag of money.

Went'st not thou to her for a purse of ducats? He came to me and I deliver'd it.

Say, wherefore didst thou lock me forth to-day? And why dost thou deny the bag of gold? I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.

And, gentle master, I received no gold, But I confess, sir, that we were lock'd out.

I will discharge thee ere I go from thee: Bear me forthwith unto his creditor, And, knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.

Good master doctor, see him safe convey'd Home to my house.

O most unhappy day! O most unhappy strumpet! Master, I am here entered in bond for you.

Out on thee, villain! wherefore dost thou mad me? Will you be bound for nothing? be mad, good master: cry 'The devil!' God help, poor souls, how idly do they talk! Go bear him hence.

Sister, go you with me. Say now, whose suit is he arrested at? One Angelo, a goldsmith: do you know him? I know the man.

Say, how grows it due? Due for a chain your husband had of him.

When as your husband all in rage to-day Came to my house and took away my ring-- The ring I saw upon his finger now-- Straight after did I meet him with a chain.

Come, gaoler, bring me where the goldsmith is: I long to know the truth hereof at large.

Come to the Centaur, fetch our stuff from thence: I long that we were safe and sound aboard.

I will not stay to-night for all the town, Therefore away, to get our stuff aboard.

I am sorry, sir, that I have hinder'd you, But, I protest, he had the chain of me, Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.

How is the man esteemed here in the city? Of very reverend reputation, sir, Of credit infinite, highly beloved, Second to none that lives here in the city: His word might bear my wealth at any time.

'Tis so, and that self chain about his neck Which he forswore most monstrously to have.

Who heard me to deny it or forswear it? These ears of mine, thou know'st did hear thee.

Fie on thee, wretch! 'tis pity that thou livest To walk where any honest man resort.

Thou art a villain to impeach me thus: I'll prove mine honour and mine honesty Against thee presently, if thou darest stand.

They draw Hold, hurt him not, for God's sake! he is mad.

Some get within him, take his sword away: Bind Dromio too, and bear them to my house.

Run, master, run, for God's sake, take a house! This is some priory.

Wherefore throng you hither? To fetch my poor distracted husband hence.

Let us come in, that we may bind him fast And bear him home for his recovery.

How long hath this possession held the man? This week he hath been heavy, sour, sad, And much different from the man he was, But till this afternoon his passion Ne'er brake into extremity of rage.

Which of these sorrows is he subject to? To none of these, except it be the last, Namely, some love that drew him oft from home.

The venom clamours of a jealous woman Poisons more deadly than a mad dog's tooth.

It seems his sleeps were hinder'd by thy railing, And therefore comes it that his head is light.

She never reprehended him but mildly, When he demean'd himself rough, rude and wildly.

Why bear you these rebukes and answer not? She did betray me to my own reproof.

Neither: he took this place for sanctuary, And it shall privilege him from your hands Till I have brought him to his wits again, Or lose my labour in assaying it.

I will attend my husband, be his nurse, Diet his sickness, for it is my office, And will have no attorney but myself, And therefore let me have him home with me.

I will not hence and leave my husband here: And ill it doth beseem your holiness To separate the husband and the wife.

Come, go: I will fall prostrate at his feet And never rise until my tears and prayers Have won his grace to come in person hither And take perforce my husband from the abbess.

Upon what cause? To see a reverend Syracusian merchant, Who put unluckily into this bay Against the laws and statutes of this town, Beheaded publicly for his offence.

Yet once again proclaim it publicly, If any friend will pay the sum for him, He shall not die, so much we tender him.

Justice, most sacred duke, against the abbess! She is a virtuous and a reverend lady: It cannot be that she hath done thee wrong.

Once did I get him bound and sent him home, Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went, That here and there his fury had committed.

Then they fled Into this abbey, whither we pursued them: And here the abbess shuts the gates on us And will not suffer us to fetch him out, Nor send him forth that we may bear him hence.

Therefore, most gracious duke, with thy command Let him be brought forth and borne hence for help.

Long since thy husband served me in my wars, And I to thee engaged a prince's word, When thou didst make him master of thy bed, To do him all the grace and good I could.

Go, some of you, knock at the abbey-gate And bid the lady abbess come to me.

Peace, fool! thy master and his man are here, And that is false thou dost report to us.

Mistress, upon my life, I tell you true, I have not breathed almost since I did see it.

He cries for you, and vows, if he can take you, To scorch your face and to disfigure you.

Guard with halberds! Ay me, it is my husband! Witness you, That he is borne about invisible: Even now we housed him in the abbey here, And now he's there, past thought of human reason.

Unless the fear of death doth make me dote, I see my son Antipholus and Dromio.

This day, great duke, she shut the doors upon me, While she with harlots feasted in my house.

A grievous fault! Say, woman, didst thou so? No, my good lord: myself, he and my sister To-day did dine together.

My liege, I am advised what I say, Neither disturbed with the effect of wine, Nor heady-rash, provoked with raging ire, Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad.

Our dinner done, and he not coming thither, I went to seek him: in the street I met him And in his company that gentleman.

There did this perjured goldsmith swear me down That I this day of him received the chain, Which, God he knows, I saw not: for the which He did arrest me with an officer.

I did obey, and sent my peasant home For certain ducats: he with none return'd Then fairly I bespoke the officer To go in person with me to my house.

By the way we met My wife, her sister, and a rabble more Of vile confederates.

My lord, in truth, thus far I witness with him, That he dined not at home, but was lock'd out.

But had he such a chain of thee or no? He had, my lord: and when he ran in here, These people saw the chain about his neck.

I never came within these abbey-walls, Nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me: I never saw the chain, so help me Heaven! And this is false you burden me withal.

Why, what an intricate impeach is this! I think you all have drunk of Circe's cup.

If here you housed him, here he would have been, If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly: You say he dined at home, the goldsmith here Denies that saying.

Sirrah, what say you? Sir, he dined with her there, at the Porpentine.

Saw'st thou him enter at the abbey here? As sure, my liege, as I do see your grace.

Go call the abbess hither. I think you are all mated or stark mad.

Most mighty duke, vouchsafe me speak a word: Haply I see a friend will save my life And pay the sum that may deliver me.

Ourselves we do remember, sir, by you, For lately we were bound, as you are now You are not Pinch's patient, are you, sir? Why look you strange on me? you know me well.

Ay, sir, but I am sure I do not, and whatsoever a man denies, you are now bound to believe him.

But seven years since, in Syracusa, boy, Thou know'st we parted: but perhaps, my son, Thou shamest to acknowledge me in misery.

The duke and all that know me in the city Can witness with me that it is not so I ne'er saw Syracusa in my life.

I tell thee, Syracusian, twenty years Have I been patron to Antipholus, During which time he ne'er saw Syracusa: I see thy age and dangers make thee dote.

Re-enter AEMILIA, with ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse and DROMIO of Syracuse Most mighty duke, behold a man much wrong'd.

All gather to see them I see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive me.

One of these men is Genius to the other, And so of these.

Which is the natural man, And which the spirit? who deciphers them? I, sir, am Dromio, command him away.

AEgeon art thou not? or else his ghost? O, my old master! who hath bound him here? Whoever bound him, I will loose his bonds And gain a husband by his liberty.

What then became of them I cannot tell I to this fortune that you see me in.

Antipholus, thou camest from Corinth first? No, sir, not I, I came from Syracuse.

I came from Corinth, my most gracious lord,-- And I with him.

Brought to this town by that most famous warrior, Duke Menaphon, your most renowned uncle.

Which of you two did dine with me to-day? I, gentle mistress.

And are not you my husband? No, I say nay to that.

And so do I, yet did she call me so: And this fair gentlewoman, her sister here, Did call me brother.

To Luciana What I told you then, I hope I shall have leisure to make good, If this be not a dream I see and hear.

I sent you money, sir, to be your bail, By Dromio, but I think he brought it not.

This purse of ducats I received from you, And Dromio, my man, did bring them me.

I see we still did meet each other's man, And I was ta'en for him, and he for me, And thereupon these errors are arose.

There, take it, and much thanks for my good cheer.

Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail Of you, my sons, and till this present hour My heavy burden ne'er delivered.

Master, shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard? Dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embark'd? Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.

I am your master, Dromio: Come, go with us, we'll look to that anon: Embrace thy brother there, rejoice with him.

There is a fat friend at your master's house, That kitchen'd me for you to-day at dinner: She now shall be my sister, not my wife.

Methinks you are my glass, and not my brother: I see by you I am a sweet-faced youth.

Will you walk in to see their gossiping? Not I, sir, you are my elder.

That's a question: how shall we try it? We'll draw cuts for the senior: till then lead thou first.

Nay, then, thus: We came into the world like brother and brother, And now let's go hand in hand, not one before another.

You are all resolved rather to die than to famish? Resolved.

resolved. First, you know Caius Marcius is chief enemy to the people.

Let us kill him, and we'll have corn at our own price.

Is't a verdict? No more talking on't, let it be done: away, away! One word, good citizens.

We are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good.

Would you proceed especially against Caius Marcius? Against him first: he's a very dog to the commonalty.

Consider you what services he has done for his country? Very well, and could be content to give him good report fort, but that he pays himself with being proud.

What he cannot help in his nature, you account a vice in him.

You must in no way say he is covetous. If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations, he hath faults, with surplus, to tire in repetition.

Shouts within What shouts are these? The other side o' the city is risen: why stay we prating here? to the Capitol! Come, come.

Soft! who comes here? Worthy Menenius Agrippa, one that hath always loved the people.

He's one honest enough: would all the rest were so! What work's, my countrymen, in hand? where go you With bats and clubs? The matter? speak, I pray you.

Our business is not unknown to the senate, they have had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do, which now we'll show 'em in deeds.

They say poor suitors have strong breaths: they shall know we have strong arms too.

Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest neighbours, Will you undo yourselves? We cannot, sir, we are undone already.

I tell you, friends, most charitable care Have the patricians of you.

For the dearth, The gods, not the patricians, make it, and Your knees to them, not arms, must help.

Alack, You are transported by calamity Thither where more attends you, and you slander The helms o' the state, who care for you like fathers, When you curse them as enemies.

If the wars eat us not up, they will, and there's all the love they bear us.

Either you must Confess yourselves wondrous malicious, Or be accused of folly.

I shall tell you A pretty tale: it may be you have heard it, But, since it serves my purpose, I will venture To stale 't a little more.

Well, I'll hear it, sir: yet you must not think to fob off our disgrace with a tale: but, an 't please you, deliver.

The belly answer'd-- Well, sir, what answer made the belly? Sir, I shall tell you.

Your belly's answer? What! The kingly-crowned head, the vigilant eye, The counsellor heart, the arm our soldier, Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter.

'Though all at once cannot See what I do deliver out to each, Yet I can make my audit up, that all From me do back receive the flour of all, And leave me but the bran.

But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs: Rome and her rats are at the point of battle, The one side must have bale.

What's the matter, you dissentious rogues, That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion, Make yourselves scabs? We have ever your good word.

He that will give good words to thee will flatter Beneath abhorring.

What would you have, you curs, That like nor peace nor war? the one affrights you, The other makes you proud.

He that trusts to you, Where he should find you lions, finds you hares, Where foxes, geese: you are no surer, no, Than is the coal of fire upon the ice, Or hailstone in the sun.

Your virtue is To make him worthy whose offence subdues him And curse that justice did it.

Who deserves greatness Deserves your hate, and your affections are A sick man's appetite, who desires most that Which would increase his evil.

He that depends Upon your favours swims with fins of lead And hews down oaks with rushes.

Hang ye! Trust Ye? With every minute you do change a mind, And call him noble that was now your hate, Him vile that was your garland.

They say there's grain enough! Would the nobility lay aside their ruth, And let me use my sword, I'll make a quarry With thousands of these quarter'd slaves, as high As I could pick my lance.

Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded, For though abundantly they lack discretion, Yet are they passing cowardly.

Go, get you home, you fragments! Where's Caius Marcius? Here: what's the matter? The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.

I am glad on 't: then we shall ha' means to vent Our musty superfluity.

See, our best elders. Marcius, 'tis true that you have lately told us, The Volsces are in arms.

They have a leader, Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to 't.

I sin in envying his nobility, And were I any thing but what I am, I would wish me only he.

Upon my party, I'ld revolt to make Only my wars with him: he is a lion That I am proud to hunt.

Then, worthy Marcius, Attend upon Cominius to these wars.

Titus Lartius, thou Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus' face.

What, art thou stiff? stand'st out? No, Caius Marcius, I'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other, Ere stay behind this business.

O, true-bred! Your company to the Capitol, where, I know, Our greatest friends attend us.

Noble Marcius! Nay, let them follow: The Volsces have much corn, take these rats thither To gnaw their garners.

Worshipful mutiners, Your valour puts well forth: pray, follow.

Exeunt all but SICINIUS and BRUTUS Was ever man so proud as is this Marcius? He has no equal.

When we were chosen tribunes for the people,-- Mark'd you his lip and eyes? Nay.

but his taunts. Being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods.

The present wars devour him: he is grown Too proud to be so valiant.

Such a nature, Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow Which he treads on at noon: but I do wonder His insolence can brook to be commanded Under Cominius.

Though Marcius earned them not, and all his faults To Marcius shall be honours, though indeed In aught he merit not.

Let's hence, and hear How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion, More than his singularity, he goes Upon this present action.

So, your opinion is, Aufidius, That they of Rome are entered in our counsels And know how we proceed.

Our army's in the field We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready To answer us.

Nor did you think it folly To keep your great pretences veil'd till when They needs must show themselves, which in the hatching, It seem'd, appear'd to Rome.

By the discovery. We shall be shorten'd in our aim, which was To take in many towns ere almost Rome Should know we were afoot.

Nay, more, Some parcels of their power are forth already, And only hitherward.

I leave your honours. If we and Caius Marcius chance to meet, 'Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike Till one can do no more.

that it was no better than picture-like to hang by the wall, if renown made it not stir, was pleased to let him seek danger where he was like to find fame.

To a cruel war I sent him, from whence he returned, his brows bound with oak.

Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius! He'll beat Aufidius 'head below his knee And tread upon his neck.

What are you sewing here? A fine spot, in good faith.

How does your little son? I thank your ladyship, well, good madam.

He had rather see the swords, and hear a drum, than look upon his school-master.

O' my word, the father's son: I'll swear,'tis a very pretty boy.

O' my troth, I looked upon him o' Wednesday half an hour together: has such a confirmed countenance.

Come, lay aside your stitchery, I must have you play the idle husewife with me this afternoon.

Indeed, no, by your patience, I'll not over the threshold till my lord return from the wars.

Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably: come, you must go visit the good lady that lies in.

I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with my prayers, but I cannot go thither.

Why, I pray you? 'Tis not to save labour, nor that I want love.

You would be another Penelope: yet, they say, all the yarn she spun in Ulysses' absence did but fill Ithaca full of moths.

Come, I would your cambric were sensible as your finger, that you might leave pricking it for pity.

Come, you shall go with us. No, good madam, pardon me, indeed, I will not forth.

In truth, la, go with me, and I'll tell you excellent news of your husband.

Verily, I do not jest with you, there came news from him last night.

Indeed, madam? In earnest, it's true, I heard a senator speak it.

This is true, on mine honour, and so, I pray, go with us.

Give me excuse, good madam, I will obey you in every thing hereafter.

Let her alone, lady: as she is now, she will but disease our better mirth.

Prithee, Virgilia, turn thy solemness out o' door.

and go along with us. No, at a word, madam, indeed, I must not.

Say, has our general met the enemy? They lie in view, but have not spoke as yet.

No, I'll nor sell nor give him: lend you him I will For half a hundred years.

Summon the town. How far off lie these armies? Within this mile and half.

Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work, That we with smoking swords may march from hence, To help our fielded friends! Come, blow thy blast.

Enter two Senators with others on the walls Tutus Aufidius, is he within your walls? No, nor a man that fears you less than he, That's lesser than a little.

Drums afar off Hark! our drums Are bringing forth our youth.

We'll break our walls, Rather than they shall pound us up: our gates, Which yet seem shut, we, have but pinn'd with rushes, They'll open of themselves.

far off! There is Aufidius, list, what work he makes Amongst your cloven army.

O, they are at it! Their noise be our instruction.

Ladders, ho! They fear us not, but issue forth their city.

Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight With hearts more proof than shields.

Advance, brave Titus: They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts, Which makes me sweat with wrath.

Come on, my fellows: He that retires I'll take him for a Volsce, And he shall feel mine edge.

The Volsces fly, and MARCIUS follows them to the gates So, now the gates are ope: now prove good seconds: 'Tis for the followers fortune widens them, Not for the fliers: mark me, and do the like.

Alarum continues Re-enter TITUS LARTIUS What is become of Marcius? Slain, sir, doubtless.

Following the fliers at the very heels, With them he enters, who, upon the sudden, Clapp'd to their gates: he is himself alone, To answer all the city.

O noble fellow! Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword, And, when it bows, stands up.

Thou art left, Marcius: A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art, Were not so rich a jewel.

Re-enter MARCIUS, bleeding, assaulted by the enemy Look, sir.

O,'tis Marcius! Let's fetch him off, or make remain alike.

They fight, and all enter the city This will I carry to Rome.

Worthy sir, thou bleed'st, Thy exercise hath been too violent for A second course of fight.

Sir, praise me not, My work hath yet not warm'd me: fare you well: The blood I drop is rather physical Than dangerous to me: to Aufidius thus I will appear, and fight.

Whiles we have struck, By interims and conveying gusts we have heard The charges of our friends.

Ye Roman gods! Lead their successes as we wish our own, That both our powers, with smiling fronts encountering, May give you thankful sacrifice.

Thy news? The citizens of Corioli have issued, And given to Lartius and to Marcius battle: I saw our party to their trenches driven, And then I came away.

Though thou speak'st truth, Methinks thou speak'st not well.

Who's yonder, That does appear as he were flay'd? O gods He has the stamp of Marcius, and I have Before-time seen him thus.

The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabour More than I know the sound of Marcius' tongue From every meaner man.

Come I too late? Ay, if you come not in the blood of others, But mantled in your own.

Where is that slave Which told me they had beat you to your trenches? Where is he? call him hither.

Let him alone, He did inform the truth: but for our gentlemen, The common file--a plague! tribunes for them!-- The mouse ne'er shunn'd the cat as they did budge From rascals worse than they.

But how prevail'd you? Will the time serve to tell? I do not think.

Where is the enemy? are you lords o' the field? If not, why cease you till you are so? We have at disadvantage fought and did Retire to win our purpose.

Though I could wish You were conducted to a gentle bath And balms applied to, you, yet dare I never Deny your asking: take your choice of those That best can aid your action.

A certain number, Though thanks to all, must I select from all: the rest Shall bear the business in some other fight, As cause will be obey'd.

Please you to march, And four shall quickly draw out my command, Which men are best inclined.

March on, my fellows: Make good this ostentation, and you shall Divide in all with us.

If I do send, dispatch Those centuries to our aid: the rest will serve For a short holding: if we lose the field, We cannot keep the town.

Enter, from opposite sides, MARCIUS and AUFIDIUS I'll fight with none but thee, for I do hate thee Worse than a promise-breaker.

We hate alike: Not Afric owns a serpent I abhor More than thy fame and envy.

Fix thy foot. Let the first budger die the other's slave, And the gods doom him after! If I fly, Marcius, Holloa me like a hare.

Wert thou the Hector That was the whip of your bragg'd progeny, Thou shouldst not scape me here.

They fight, and certain Volsces come to the aid of  AUFIDIUS.

MARCIUS fights till they be driven in breathless Officious, and not valiant, you have shamed me In your condemned seconds.

Yet camest thou to a morsel of this feast, Having fully dined before.

O general, Here is the steed, we the caparison: Hadst thou beheld-- Pray now, no more: my mother, Who has a charter to extol her blood, When she does praise me grieves me.

I have done As you have done, that's what I can, induced As you have been, that's for my country: He that has but effected his good will Hath overta'en mine act.

I have some wounds upon me, and they smart To hear themselves remember'd.

Should they not, Well might they fester 'gainst ingratitude, And tent themselves with death.

I thank you, general, But cannot make my heart consent to take A bribe to pay my sword: I do refuse it, And stand upon my common part with those That have beheld the doing.

- Which, without note, here's many else have done,-- You shout me forth In acclamations hyperbolical, As if I loved my little should be dieted In praises sauced with lies.

Trumpets sound, and drums Caius Marcius Coriolanus! I will go wash, And when my face is fair, you shall perceive Whether I blush or no: howbeit, I thank you.

I mean to stride your steed, and at all times To undercrest your good addition To the fairness of my power.

So, to our tent, Where, ere we do repose us, we will write To Rome of our success.

You, Titus Lartius, Must to Corioli back: send us to Rome The best, with whom we may articulate, For their own good and ours.

I, that now Refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg Of my lord general.

O, well begg'd! Were he the butcher of my son, he should Be free as is the wind.

Deliver him, Titus. Marcius, his name? By Jupiter! forgot.

Have we no wine here? Go we to our tent: The blood upon your visage dries, 'tis time It should be look'd to: come.

Cornets. Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS, bloody, with two or three Soldiers The town is ta'en! 'Twill be deliver'd back on good condition.

I would I were a Roman, for I cannot, Being a Volsce, be that I am.

Go you to the city, Learn how 'tis held, and what they are that must Be hostages for Rome.

Will not you go? I am attended at the cypress grove: I pray you-- 'Tis south the city mills--bring me word thither How the world goes, that to the pace of it I may spur on my journey.

Good or bad? Not according to the prayer of the people, for they love not Marcius.

Ay, to devour him, as the hungry plebeians would the noble Marcius.

You two are old men: tell me one thing that I shall ask you.

In what enormity is Marcius poor in, that you two have not in abundance? He's poor in no one fault, but stored with all.

You blame Marcius for being proud? We do it not alone, sir.

I know you can do very little alone, for your helps are many, or else your actions would grow wondrous single: your abilities are too infant-like for doing much alone.

Meeting two such wealsmen as you are--I cannot call you Lycurguses--if the drink you give me touch my palate adversely, I make a crooked face at it.

Come, come, you are well understood to be a perfecter giber for the table than a necessary bencher in the Capitol.

Our very priests must become mockers, if they shall encounter such ridiculous subjects as you are.

Yet you must be saying, Marcius is proud, who in a cheap estimation, is worth predecessors since Deucalion, though peradventure some of the best of 'em were hereditary hangmen.

God-den to your worships: more of your conversation would infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly plebeians: I will be bold to take my leave of you.

Ha! Marcius coming home! Ay, worthy Menenius, and with most prosperous Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee.

Look, here's a letter from him: the state hath another, his wife another, and, I think, there's one at home for you.

I will make my very house reel tonight: a letter for Yes, certain, there's a letter for you, I saw't.

Is he not wounded? he was wont to come home wounded.

So do I too, if it be not too much: brings a' victory in his pocket? the wounds become him.

On's brows: Menenius, he comes the third time home with the oaken garland.

Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly? Titus Lartius writes, they fought together, but Aufidius got off.

And 'twas time for him too, I'll warrant him that: an he had stayed by him, I would not have been so fidiused for all the chests in Corioli, and the gold that's in them.

Is the senate possessed of this? Good ladies, let's go.

Wondrous! ay, I warrant you, and not without his true purchasing.

Where is he wounded? To the Tribunes God save your good worships! Marcius is coming home: he has more cause to be proud.

Where is he wounded? I' the shoulder and i' the left arm there will be large cicatrices to show the people, when he shall stand for his place.

He received in the repulse of Tarquin seven hurts i' the body.

One i' the neck, and two i' the thigh,--there's nine that I know.

He had, before this last expedition, twenty-five wounds upon him.

Now it's twenty-seven: every gash was an enemy's grave.

These are the ushers of Marcius: before him he carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears: Death, that dark spirit, in 's nervy arm doth lie, Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.

Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus! Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus! No more of this, it does offend my heart: Pray now, no more.

Now, the gods crown thee! And live you yet? To VALERIA O my sweet lady, pardon.

I know not where to turn: O, welcome home: And welcome, general: and ye're welcome all.

I could weep And I could laugh, I am light and heavy.

Yet welcome, warriors: We call a nettle but a nettle and The faults of fools but folly.

Give way there, and go on! Ere in our own house I do shade my head, The good patricians must be visited, From whom I have received not only greetings, But with them change of honours.

I have lived To see inherited my very wishes And the buildings of my fancy: only There's one thing wanting, which I doubt not but Our Rome will cast upon thee.

Know, good mother, I had rather be their servant in my way, Than sway with them in theirs.

He cannot temperately transport his honours From where he should begin and end, but will Lose those he hath won.

It was his word: O, he would miss it rather Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him, And the desire of the nobles.

I wish no better Than have him hold that purpose and to put it In execution.

It shall be to him then as our good wills, A sure destruction.

What's the matter? You are sent for to the Capitol.

Let's to the Capitol, And carry with us ears and eyes for the time, But hearts for the event.

How many stand for consulships? Three, they say: but 'tis thought of every one Coriolanus will carry it.

That's a brave fellow, but he's vengeance proud, and loves not the common people.

Now, to seem to affect the malice and displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he dislikes, to flatter them for their love.

No more of him, he is a worthy man: make way, they are coming.

Speak, good Cominius: Leave nothing out for length, and make us think Rather our state's defective for requital Than we to stretch it out.

To the Tribunes Masters o' the people, We do request your kindest ears, and after, Your loving motion toward the common body, To yield what passes here.

We are convented Upon a pleasing treaty, and have hearts Inclinable to honour and advance The theme of our assembly.

Which the rather We shall be blest to do, if he remember A kinder value of the people than He hath hereto prized them at.

That's off, that's off, I would you rather had been silent.

Please you To hear Cominius speak? Most willingly, But yet my caution was more pertinent Than the rebuke you give it.

He loves your people But tie him not to be their bedfellow.

CORIOLANUS offers to go away Nay, keep your place.

Sit, Coriolanus, never shame to hear What you have nobly done.

Your horror's pardon: I had rather have my wounds to heal again Than hear say how I got them.

No, sir: yet oft, When blows have made me stay, I fled from words.

You soothed not, therefore hurt not: but your people, I love them as they weigh.

I had rather have one scratch my head i' the sun When the alarum were struck than idly sit To hear my nothings monster'd.

I shall lack voice: the deeds of Coriolanus Should not be utter'd feebly.

It is held That valour is the chiefest virtue, and Most dignifies the haver: if it be, The man I speak of cannot in the world Be singly counterpoised.

His pupil age Man-enter'd thus, he waxed like a sea, And in the brunt of seventeen battles since He lurch'd all swords of the garland.

Worthy man! He cannot but with measure fit the honours Which we devise him.

Re-enter CORIOLANUS The senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased To make thee consul.

I do beseech you, Let me o'erleap that custom, for I cannot Put on the gown, stand naked and entreat them, For my wounds' sake, to give their suffrage: please you That I may pass this doing.

Sir, the people Must have their voices, neither will they bate One jot of ceremony.

Put them not to't: Pray you, go fit you to the custom and Take to you, as your predecessors have, Your honour with your form.

It is apart That I shall blush in acting, and might well Be taken from the people.

Mark you that? To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus, Show them the unaching scars which I should hide, As if I had received them for the hire Of their breath only! Do not stand upon't.

We recommend to you, tribunes of the people, Our purpose to them: and to our noble consul Wish we all joy and honour.

To Coriolanus come all joy and honour! Flourish of cornets.

Exeunt all but SICINIUS and BRUTUS You see how he intends to use the people.

May they perceive's intent! He will require them, As if he did contemn what he requested Should be in them to give.

Come, we'll inform them Of our proceedings here: on the marketplace, I know, they do attend us.

Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to deny him.

Ingratitude is monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful, were to make a monster of the multitude: of the which we being members, should bring ourselves to be monstrous members.

And to make us no better thought of, a little help will serve, for once we stood up about the corn, he himself stuck not to call us the many-headed multitude.

Think you so? Which way do you judge my wit would Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another man's will,'tis strongly wedged up in a block-head, but if it were at liberty, 'twould, sure, southward.

Why that way? To lose itself in a fog, where being three parts melted away with rotten dews, the fourth would return for conscience sake, to help to get thee a wife.

You are never without your tricks: you may, you may.

Are you all resolved to give your voices? But that's no matter, the greater part carries it.

I say, if he would incline to the people, there was never a worthier man.

Here he comes, and in the gown of humility: mark his behavior.

We are not to stay all together, but to come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos, and by threes.

He's to make his requests by particulars, wherein every one of us has a single honour, in giving him our own voices with our own tongues: therefore follow me, and I direct you how you shall go by him.

O me, the gods! You must not speak of that: you must desire them To think upon you.

Think upon me! hang 'em! I would they would forget me, like the virtues Which our divines lose by 'em.

You'll mar all: I'll leave you: pray you, speak to 'em, I pray you, In wholesome manner.

Bid them wash their faces And keep their teeth clean.

Re-enter two of the Citizens So, here comes a brace.

Re-enter a third Citizen You know the cause, air, of my standing here.

How not your own desire? No, sir,'twas never my desire yet to trouble the poor with begging.

You must think, if we give you any thing, we hope to gain by you.

Well then, I pray, your price o' the consulship? The price is to ask it kindly.

Kindly! Sir, I pray, let me ha't: I have wounds to show you, which shall be yours in private.

Your good voice, sir, what say you? You shall ha' it, worthy sir.

I have your alms: adieu. But this is something odd.

Re-enter two other Citizens Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your voices that I may be consul, I have here the customary gown.

You have deserved nobly of your country, and you have not deserved nobly.

Your enigma? You have been a scourge to her enemies, you have been a rod to her friends, you have not indeed loved the common people.

You should account me the more virtuous that I have not been common in my love.

We hope to find you our friend, and therefore give you our voices heartily.

I will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no further.

The gods give you joy, sir, heartily! Most sweet voices! Better it is to die, better to starve, Than crave the hire which first we do deserve.

Rather than fool it so, Let the high office and the honour go To one that would do thus.

I am half through, The one part suffer'd, the other will I do.

Re-enter three Citizens more Here come more voices.

He has done nobly, and cannot go without any honest man's voice.

Therefore let him be consul: the gods give him joy, and make him good friend to the people! Amen, amen.

Is this done? The custom of request you have discharged: The people do admit you, and are summon'd To meet anon, upon your approbation.

That I'll straight do, and, knowing myself again, Repair to the senate-house.

He has it now, and by his looks methink 'Tis warm at 's heart.

will you dismiss the people? Re-enter Citizens How now, my masters! have you chose this man? He has our voices, sir.

Amen, sir: to my poor unworthy notice, He mock'd us when he begg'd our voices.

Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says He used us scornfully: he should have show'd us His marks of merit, wounds received for's country.

When we granted that, Here was 'I thank you for your voices: thank you: Your most sweet voices: now you have left your voices, I have no further with you.

And will deny him: I'll have five hundred voices of that sound.

I twice five hundred and their friends to piece 'em.

A fault on us, your tribunes, that we laboured, No impediment between, but that you must Cast your election on him.

Say, you ne'er had done't-- Harp on that still--but by our putting on, And presently, when you have drawn your number, Repair to the Capitol.

Let them go on, This mutiny were better put in hazard, Than stay, past doubt, for greater: If, as his nature is, he fall in rage With their refusal, both observe and answer The vantage of his anger.

To the Capitol, come: We will be there before the stream o' the people, And this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own, Which we have goaded onward.

Enter CORIOLANUS, MENENIUS, all the Gentry, COMINIUS, TITUS LARTIUS, and other Senators Tullus Aufidius then had made new head? He had, my lord, and that it was which caused Our swifter composition.

So then the Volsces stand but as at first, Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road.

They are worn, lord consul, so, That we shall hardly in our ages see Their banners wave again.

Saw you Aufidius? On safe-guard he  came to me, and did curse Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely Yielded the town: he is retired to Antium.

I wish I had a cause to seek him there, To oppose his hatred fully.

Welcome home. Behold, these are the tribunes of the people, The tongues o' the common mouth: I do despise them, For they do prank them in authority, Against all noble sufferance.

Ha! what is that? It will be dangerous to go on: no further.

What makes this change? The matter? Hath he not pass'd the noble and the common? Cominius, no.

Have I had children's voices? Tribunes, give way, he shall to the market-place.

It is a purposed thing, and grows by plot, To curb the will of the nobility: Suffer't, and live with such as cannot rule Nor ever will be ruled.

Have you inform'd them sithence? How! I inform them! You are like to do such business.

Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds, Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me Your fellow tribune.

This paltering Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus Deserved this so dishonour'd rub, laid falsely I' the plain way of his merit.

Tell me of corn! This was my speech, and I will speak't again-- Not now, not now.

You speak o' the people, As if you were a god to punish, not A man of their infirmity.

What, what? his choler? Were I as patient as the midnight sleep, By Jove, 'twould be my mind! It is a mind That shall remain a poison where it is, Not poison any further.

Shall remain! Hear you this Triton of the minnows? mark you His absolute 'shall'? 'Twas from the canon.

If you are learn'd, Be not as common fools, if you are not, Let them have cushions by you.

You are plebeians, If they be senators: and they are no less, When, both your voices blended, the great'st taste Most palates theirs.

They choose their magistrate, And such a one as he, who puts his 'shall,' His popular 'shall' against a graver bench Than ever frown in Greece.

By Jove himself! It makes the consuls base: and my soul aches To know, when two authorities are up, Neither supreme, how soon confusion May enter 'twixt the gap of both and take The one by the other.

Whoever gave that counsel, to give forth The corn o' the storehouse gratis, as 'twas used Sometime in Greece,-- Well, well, no more of that.

Though there the people had more absolute power, I say, they nourish'd disobedience, fed The ruin of the state.

Why, shall the people give One that speaks thus their voice? I'll give my reasons, More worthier than their voices.

They know the corn Was not our recompense, resting well assured That ne'er did service for't: being press'd to the war, Even when the navel of the state was touch'd, They would not thread the gates.

Thus we debase The nature of our seats and make the rabble Call our cares fears, which will in time Break ope the locks o' the senate and bring in The crows to peck the eagles.

Has spoken like a traitor, and shall answer As traitors do.

Go, call the people: in whose name myself Attach thee as a traitorous innovator, A foe to the public weal: obey, I charge thee, And follow to thine answer.

Hence, old goat! Senators,  and C	We'll surety him.

Hence, rotten thing! or I shall shake thy bones Out of thy garments.

Here's he that would take from you all your power.

You, tribunes To the people! Coriolanus, patience! Speak, good Sicinius.

Hear me, people, peace! Let's hear our tribune: peace Speak, speak, speak.

You are at point to lose your liberties: Marcius would have all from you, Marcius, Whom late you have named for consul.

Fie, fie, fie! This is the way to kindle, not to quench.

What is the city but the people? The people are the city.

By the consent of all, we were establish'd The people's magistrates.

That is the way to lay the city flat, To bring the roof to the foundation, And bury all, which yet distinctly ranges, In heaps and piles of ruin.

Or let us stand to our authority, Or let us lose it.

We do here pronounce, Upon the part o' the people, in whose power We were elected theirs, Marcius is worthy Of present death.

Therefore lay hold of him, Bear him to the rock Tarpeian, and from thence Into destruction cast him.

AEdiles, seize him! Yield, Marcius, yield! Hear me one word, Beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.

Peace, peace! country's friend, And temperately proceed to what you would Thus violently redress.

Sir, those cold ways, That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous Where the disease is violent.

Drawing his sword There's some among you have beheld me fighting: Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.

Sham it be put to that? The gods forbid! I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house, Leave us to cure this cause.

For 'tis a sore upon us, You cannot tent yourself: be gone, beseech you.

I could myself Take up a brace o' the best of them, yea, the two tribunes: But now 'tis odds beyond arithmetic, And manhood is call'd foolery, when it stands Against a falling fabric.

Will you hence, Before the tag return? whose rage doth rend Like interrupted waters and o'erbear What they are used to bear.

Pray you, be gone: I'll try whether my old wit be in request With those that have but little: this must be patch'd With cloth of any colour.

His nature is too noble for the world: He would not flatter Neptune for his trident, Or Jove for's power to thunder.

His heart's his mouth: What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent, And, being angry, does forget that ever He heard the name of death.

He shall well know The noble tribunes are the people's mouths, And we their hands.

Sir, sir,-- Do not cry havoc, where you should but hunt With modest warrant.

Sir, how comes't that you Have holp to make this rescue? Hear me speak: As I do know the consul's worthiness, So can I name his faults,-- Consul! what consul? The consul Coriolanus.

If, by the tribunes' leave, and yours, good people, I may be heard, I would crave a word or two, The which shall turn you to no further harm Than so much loss of time.

Speak briefly then, For we are peremptory to dispatch This viperous traitor: to eject him hence Were but one danger, and to keep him here Our certain death: therefore it is decreed He dies to-night.

O, he's a limb that has but a disease, Mortal, to cut it off, to cure it, easy.

Merely awry: when he did love his country, It honour'd him.

The service of the foot Being once gangrened, is not then respected For what before it was.

Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence: Lest his infection, being of catching nature, Spread further.

This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find The harm of unscann'd swiftness, will too late Tie leaden pounds to's heels.

Proceed by process, Lest parties, as he is beloved, break out, And sack great Rome with Romans.

If it were so,-- What do ye talk? Have we not had a taste of his obedience? Our aediles smote? ourselves resisted? Come.

Consider this: he has been bred i' the wars Since he could draw a sword, and is ill school'd In bolted language, meal and bran together He throws without distinction.

Give me leave, I'll go to him, and undertake to bring him Where he shall answer, by a lawful form, In peace, to his utmost peril.

Noble tribunes, It is the humane way: the other course Will prove too bloody, and the end of it Unknown to the beginning.

Noble Menenius, Be you then as the people's officer.

We'll attend you there: Where, if you bring not Marcius, we'll proceed In our first way.

To the Senators Let me desire your company: he must come, Or what is worst will follow.

I talk of you: Why did you wish me milder? would you have me False to my nature? Rather say I play The man I am.

O, sir, sir, sir, I would have had you put your power well on, Before you had worn it out.

Come, come, you have been too rough, something too rough, You must return and mend it.

There's no remedy, Unless, by not so doing, our good city Cleave in the midst, and perish.

Pray, be counsell'd: I have a heart as little apt as yours, But yet a brain that leads my use of anger To better vantage.

Well said, noble woman? Before he should thus stoop to the herd, but that The violent fit o' the time craves it as physic For the whole state, I would put mine armour on, Which I can scarcely bear.

Well, what then? what then? Repent what you have spoke.

For them! I cannot do it to the gods, Must I then do't to them? You are too absolute, Though therein you can never be too noble, But when extremities speak.

I have heard you say, Honour and policy, like unsever'd friends, I' the war do grow together: grant that, and tell me, In peace what each of them by the other lose, That they combine not there.

Now, this no more dishonours you at all Than to take in a town with gentle words, Which else would put you to your fortune and The hazard of much blood.

Noble lady! Come, go with us, speak fair: you may salve so, Not what is dangerous present, but the loss Of what is past.

This but done, Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours, For they have pardons, being ask'd, as free As words to little purpose.

Prithee now, Go, and be ruled: although I know thou hadst rather Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf Than flatter him in a bower.

Here is Cominius. I have been i' the market-place, and, sir,'tis fit You make strong party, or defend yourself By calmness or by absence: all's in anger.

I think 'twill serve, if he Can thereto frame his spirit.

He must, and will Prithee now, say you will, and go about it.

To the market-place! You have put me now to such a part which never I shall discharge to the life.

I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said My praises made thee first a soldier, so, To have my praise for this, perform a part Thou hast not done before.

At thy choice, then: To beg of thee, it is my more dishonour Than thou of them.

Come all to ruin, let Thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death With as big heart as thou.

Do as thou list Thy valiantness was mine, thou suck'dst it from me, But owe thy pride thyself.

Pray, be content: Mother, I am going to the market-place, Chide me no more.

I'll mountebank their loves, Cog their hearts from them, and come home beloved Of all the trades in Rome.

I'll return consul, Or never trust to what my tongue can do I' the way of flattery further.

Away! the tribunes do attend you: arm yourself To answer mildly, for they are prepared With accusations, as I hear, more strong Than are upon you yet.

Pray you, let us go: Let them accuse me by invention, I Will answer in mine honour.

Mildly! In this point charge him home, that he affects Tyrannical power: if he evade us there, Enforce him with his envy to the people, And that the spoil got on the Antiates Was ne'er distributed.

How accompanied? With old Menenius, and those senators That always favour'd him.

Have you a catalogue Of all the voices that we have procured Set down by the poll? I have, 'tis ready.

Insisting on the old prerogative And power i' the truth o' the cause.

And when such time they have begun to cry, Let them not cease, but with a din confused Enforce the present execution Of what we chance to sentence.

Make them be strong and ready for this hint, When we shall hap to give 't them.

Ay, as an ostler, that for the poorest piece Will bear the knave by the volume.

Re-enter AEdile, with Citizens Draw near, ye people.

Lo, citizens, he says he is content: The warlike service he has done, consider, think Upon the wounds his body bears, which show Like graves i' the holy churchyard.

Scratches with briers, Scars to move laughter only.

What is the matter That being pass'd for consul with full voice, I am so dishonour'd that the very hour You take it off again? Answer to us.

We charge you, that you have contrived to take From Rome all season'd office and to wind Yourself into a power tyrannical, For which you are a traitor to the people.

But since he hath Served well for Rome,-- What do you prate of service? I talk of that, that know it.

It shall be so, it shall be so, let him away: He's banish'd, and it shall be so.

Hear me, my masters, and my common friends,-- He's sentenced, no more hearing.

Let me speak: I have been consul, and can show for Rome Her enemies' marks upon me.

Come, leave your tears: a brief farewell: the beast With many heads butts me away.

O heavens! O heavens! Nay! prithee, woman,-- Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome, And occupations perish! What, what, what! I shall be loved when I am lack'd.

Nay, mother. Resume that spirit, when you were wont to say, If you had been the wife of Hercules, Six of his labours you'ld have done, and saved Your husband so much sweat.

Thou old and true Menenius, Thy tears are salter than a younger man's, And venomous to thine eyes.

My sometime general, I have seen thee stem, and thou hast oft beheld Heart-hardening spectacles, tell these sad women 'Tis fond to wail inevitable strokes, As 'tis to laugh at 'em.

Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius With thee awhile: determine on some course, More than a wild exposture to each chance That starts i' the way before thee.

Fare ye well: Thou hast years upon thee, and thou art too full Of the wars' surfeits, to go rove with one That's yet unbruised: bring me but out at gate.

Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and My friends of noble touch, when I am forth, Bid me farewell, and smile.

I pray you, come. While I remain above the ground, you shall Hear from me still, and never of me aught But what is like me formerly.

Come, let's not weep. If I could shake off but one seven years From these old arms and legs, by the good gods, I'ld with thee every foot.

Bid them all home, he's gone, and we'll no further.

The nobility are vex'd, whom we see have sided In his behalf.

Now we have shown our power, Let us seem humbler after it is done Than when it was a-doing.

Bid them home: Say their great enemy is gone, and they Stand in their ancient strength.

O, ye're well met: the hoarded plague o' the gods Requite your love! Peace, peace, be not so loud.

If that I could for weeping, you should hear,-- Nay, and you shall hear some.

To BRUTUS Will you be gone? To say so to my husband.

Are  you mankind? Ay, fool, is that a shame? Note but this fool.

I'll tell thee what, yet go: Nay, but thou shalt stay too: I would my son Were in Arabia, and thy tribe before him, His good sword in his hand.

What then? What then! He'ld make an end of thy posterity.

Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome! Come, come, peace.

I would he had continued to his country As he began, and not unknit himself The noble knot he made.

'I would he had'! 'Twas you incensed the rabble: Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth As I can of those mysteries which heaven Will not have earth to know.

Now, pray, sir, get you gone: You have done a brave deed.

Ere you go, hear this:-- As far as doth the Capitol exceed The meanest house in Rome, so far my son-- This lady's husband here, this, do you see-- Whom you have banish'd, does exceed you all.

Why stay we to be baited With one that wants her wits? Take my prayers with you.

I would the gods had nothing else to do But to confirm my curses! Could I meet 'em But once a-day, it would unclog my heart Of what lies heavy to't.

You have told them home, And, by my troth, you have cause.

You'll sup with me? Anger's my meat, I sup upon myself, And so shall starve with feeding.

Come, let's go: Leave this faint puling and lament as I do, In anger, Juno-like.

Come, come, come. Fie, fie, fie! I know you well, sir, and you know me: your name, I think, is Adrian.

I am a Roman, and my services are, as you are, against 'em: know you me yet? Nicanor? no.

You had more beard when I last saw you, but your favour is well approved by your tongue.

What's the news in Rome? I have a note from the Volscian state, to find you out there: you have well saved me a day's journey.

There hath been in Rome strange insurrections, the people against the senators, patricians, and nobles.

Hath been! is it ended, then? Our state thinks not so: they are in a most warlike preparation, and hope to come upon them in the heat of their division.

This lies glowing, I can tell you, and is almost mature for the violent breaking out.

You will be welcome with this intelligence, Nicanor.

I have heard it said, the fittest time to corrupt a man's wife is when she's fallen out with her husband.

Your noble Tullus Aufidius will appear well in these wars, his great opposer, Coriolanus, being now in no request of his country.

I am most fortunate, thus accidentally to encounter you: you have ended my business, and I will merrily accompany you home.

I shall, between this and supper, tell you most strange things from Rome, all tending to the good of their adversaries.

Have you an army ready, say you? A most royal one, the centurions and their charges, distinctly billeted, already in the entertainment, and to be on foot at an hour's warning.

I am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am the man, I think, that shall set them in present action.

So, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of your company.

You take my part from me, sir, I have the most cause to be glad of yours.

Direct me, if it be your will, Where great Aufidius lies: is he in Antium? He is, and feasts the nobles of the state At his house this night.

Which is his house, beseech you? This, here before you.

So with me: My birth-place hate I, and my love's upon This enemy town.

I'll enter: if he slay me, He does fair justice, if he give me way, I'll do his country service.

Enter a Servingman Wine, wine, wine! What service is here! I think our fellows are asleep.

Cotus! A goodly house: the feast smells well, but I Appear not like a guest.

Re-enter the first Servingman What would you have, friend? whence are you? Here's no place for you: pray, go to the door.

I have deserved no better entertainment, In being Coriolanus.

Re-enter second Servingman Whence are you, sir? Has the porter his eyes in his head, that he gives entrance to such companions? Pray, get you out.

What fellow's this? A strange one as ever I looked on: I cannot get him out of the house: prithee, call my master to him.

What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you, avoid the house.

Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other station, here's no place for you, pray you, avoid: come.

Follow your function, go, and batten on cold bits.

Pushes him away What, you will not? Prithee, tell my master what a strange guest he has here.

Under the canopy! Where's that? I' the city of kites and crows.

I' the city of kites and crows! What an ass it is! Then thou dwellest with daws too? No, I serve not thy master.

How, sir! do you meddle with my master? Ay, 'tis an honester service than to meddle with thy mistress.

Thou pratest, and pratest, serve with thy trencher, hence! Beats him away.

Exit third Servingman Where is this fellow? Here, sir: I'ld have beaten him like a dog, but for disturbing the lords within.

What is thy name? A name unmusical to the Volscians' ears, And harsh in sound to thine.

Say, what's thy name? Thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face Bears a command in't, though thy tackle's torn.

O Marcius, Marcius! Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart A root of ancient envy.

If Jupiter Should from yond cloud speak divine things, And say 'Tis true,' I'ld not believe them more Than thee, all noble Marcius.

O, come, go in, And take our friendly senators by the hands, Who now are here, taking their leaves of me, Who am prepared against your territories, Though not for Rome itself.

But come in: Let me commend thee first to those that shall Say yea to thy desires.

A thousand welcomes! And more a friend than e'er an enemy, Yet, Marcius, that was much.

Your hand: most welcome! Here's a strange alteration! By my hand, I had thought to have strucken him with a cudgel, and yet my mind gave me his clothes made a false report of him.

What an arm he has! he turned me about with his finger and his thumb, as one would set up a top.

Nay, I knew by his face that there was something in him: he had, sir, a kind of face, methought,--I cannot tell how to term it.

He had so, looking as it were--would I were hanged, but I thought there was more in him than I could think.

So did I, I'll be sworn: he is simply the rarest man i' the world.

I think he is: but a greater soldier than he you wot on.

Nay, not so neither: but I take him to be the greater soldier.

Faith, look you, one cannot tell how to say that: for the defence of a town, our general is excellent.

Re-enter third Servingman O slaves, I can tell you news,-- news, you rascals! What, what, what? let's partake.

I would not be a Roman, of all nations, I had as lieve be a condemned man.

Wherefore? wherefore? Why, here's he that was wont to thwack our general, Caius Marcius.

Why do you say 'thwack our general '? I do not say 'thwack our general,' but he was always good enough for him.

Come, we are fellows and friends: he was ever too hard for him, I have heard him say so himself.

He was too hard for him directly, to say the troth on't: before Corioli he scotched him and notched him like a carbon ado.

An he had been cannibally given, he might have broiled and eaten him too.

But the bottom of the news is that our general is cut i' the middle and but one half of what he was yesterday, for the other has half, by the entreaty and grant of the whole table.

He'll go, he says, and sowl the porter of Rome gates by the ears: he will mow all down before him, and leave his passage polled.

And he's as like to do't as any man I can imagine.

This peace is nothing, but to rust iron, increase tailors, and breed ballad-makers.

Let me have war, say I, it exceeds peace as far as day does night, it's spritely, waking, audible, and full of vent.

Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy, mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible, a getter of more bastard children than war's a destroyer of men.

'Tis so: and as war, in some sort, may be said to be a ravisher, so it cannot be denied but peace is a great maker of cuckolds.

They are rising, they are rising. In, in, in, in! We hear not of him, neither need we fear him, His remedies are tame i' the present peace And quietness of the people, which before Were in wild hurry.

Is this Menenius? 'Tis he,'tis he: O, he is grown most kind of late.

Hail sir! Hail to you both! Your Coriolanus Is not much miss'd, but with his friends: The commonwealth doth stand, and so would do, Were he more angry at it.

All's well, and might have been much better, if He could have temporized.

Where is he, hear you? Nay, I hear nothing: his mother and his wife Hear nothing from him.

The gods preserve you both! God-den, our neighbours.

Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees, Are bound to pray for you both.

Live, and thrive! Farewell, kind neighbours: we wish'd Coriolanus Had loved you as we did.

This is a happier and more comely time Than when these fellows ran about the streets, Crying confusion.

Caius Marcius was A worthy officer i' the war, but insolent, O'ercome with pride, ambitious past all thinking, And affecting one sole throne, Without assistance.

We should by this, to all our lamentation, If he had gone forth consul, found it so.

The gods have well prevented it, and Rome Sits safe and still without him.

'Tis Aufidius, Who, hearing of our Marcius' banishment, Thrusts forth his horns again into the world, Which were inshell'd when Marcius stood for Rome, And durst not once peep out.

Come, what talk you Of Marcius? Go see this rumourer whipp'd.

Cannot be! We have record that very well it can, And three examples of the like have been Within my age.

But reason with the fellow, Before you punish him, where he heard this, Lest you shall chance to whip your information And beat the messenger who bids beware Of what is to be dreaded.

The nobles in great earnestness are going All to the senate-house: some news is come That turns their countenances.

'Tis this slave,-- Go whip him, 'fore the people's eyes:--his raising, Nothing but his report.

Yes, worthy sir, The slave's report is seconded, and more, More fearful, is deliver'd.

This is most likely! Raised only, that the weaker sort may wish Good Marcius home again.

This is unlikely: He and Aufidius can no more atone Than violentest contrariety.

Pray now, your news? You have made fair work, I fear me.

You have made good work, You and your apron-men, you that stood so up much on the voice of occupation and The breath of garlic-eaters! He will shake Your Rome about your ears.

You have made fair work! But is this true, sir? Ay, and you'll look pale Before you find it other.

All the regions Do smilingly revolt, and who resist Are mock'd for valiant ignorance, And perish constant fools.

Who is't can blame him? Your enemies and his find something in him.

We are all undone, unless The noble man have mercy.

'Tis true: If he were putting to my house the brand That should consume it, I have not the face To say 'Beseech you, cease.

You have made fair hands, You and your crafts! you have crafted fair! You have brought A trembling upon Rome, such as was never So incapable of help.

How! Was it we? we loved him but, like beasts And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters, Who did hoot him out o' the city.

Tullus Aufidius, The second name of men, obeys his points As if he were his officer: desperation Is all the policy, strength and defence, That Rome can make against them.

And is Aufidius with him? You are they That made the air unwholesome, when you cast Your stinking greasy caps in hooting at Coriolanus' exile.

Now he's coming, And not a hair upon a soldier's head Which will not prove a whip: as many coxcombs As you threw caps up will he tumble down, And pay you for your voices.

'Tis no matter, if he could burn us all into one coal, We have deserved it.

For mine own part, When I said, banish him, I said 'twas pity.

And so did I, and, to say the truth, so did very many of us: that we did, we did for the best, and though we willingly consented to his banishment, yet it was against our will.

The gods be good to us! Come, masters, let's home.

I ever said we were i' the wrong when we banished So did we all.

Would half my wealth Would buy this for a lie! Pray, let us go.

I cannot help it now, Unless, by using means, I lame the foot Of our design.

He bears himself more proudlier, Even to my person, than I thought he would When first I did embrace him: yet his nature In that's no changeling, and I must excuse What cannot be amended.

Yet I wish, sir,-- I mean for your particular,--you had not Join'd in commission with him, but either Had borne the action of yourself, or else To him had left it solely.

I understand thee well, and be thou sure, when he shall come to his account, he knows not What I can urge against him.

Although it seems, And so he thinks, and is no less apparent To the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly.

I think he'll be to Rome As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it By sovereignty of nature.

So our virtues Lie in the interpretation of the time: And power, unto itself most commendable, Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair To extol what it hath done.

One fire drives out one fire, one nail, one nail, Rights by rights falter, strengths by strengths do fail.

When, Caius, Rome is thine, Thou art poor'st of all, then shortly art thou mine.

No, I'll not go: you hear what he hath said Which was sometime his general, who loved him In a most dear particular.

He call'd me father: But what o' that? Go, you that banish'd him, A mile before his tent fall down, and knee The way into his mercy: nay, if he coy'd To hear Cominius speak, I'll keep at home.

Do you hear? Yet one time he did call me by my name: I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops That we have bled together.

Coriolanus He would not answer to: forbad all names, He was a kind of nothing, titleless, Till he had forged himself a name o' the fire Of burning Rome.

Nay, pray, be patient: if you refuse your aid In this so never-needed help, yet do not Upbraid's with our distress.

But, sure, if you Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue, More than the instant army we can make, Might stop our countryman.

What should I do? Only make trial what your love can do For Rome, towards Marcius.

Yet, to bite his lip And hum at good Cominius, much unhearts me.

You know the very road into his kindness, And cannot lose your way.

I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye Red as 'twould burn Rome, and his injury The gaoler to his pity.

Unless his noble mother, and his wife, Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him For mercy to his country.

Therefore, let's hence, And with our fair entreaties haste them on.

You guard like men, 'tis well: but, by your leave, I am an officer of state, and come To speak with Coriolanus.

You may not pass, you must return: our general Will no more hear from thence.

You'll see your Rome embraced with fire before You'll speak with Coriolanus.

Good my friends, If you have heard your general talk of Rome, And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks, My name hath touch'd your ears it is Menenius.

Be it so, go back: the virtue of your name Is not here passable.

Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his behalf as you have uttered words in your own, you should not pass here, no, though it were as virtuous to lie as to live chastely.

Therefore, go back. Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius, always factionary on the party of your general.

Howsoever you have been his liar, as you say you have, I am one that, telling true under him, must say, you cannot pass.

Therefore, go back. Has he dined, canst thou tell? for I would not speak with him till after dinner.

You are a Roman, are you? I am, as thy general is.

Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he would use me with estimation.

Back, I say, go, lest I let forth your half-pint of blood, back,--that's the utmost of your having: back.

I was hardly moved to come to thee, but being assured none but myself could move thee, I have been blown out of your gates with sighs, and conjure thee to pardon Rome, and thy petitionary countrymen.

The good gods assuage thy wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet here,--this, who, like a block, hath denied my access to thee.

My affairs Are servanted to others: though I owe My revenge properly, my remission lies In Volscian breasts.

That we have been familiar, Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison, rather Than pity note how much.

Therefore, be gone. Mine ears against your suits are stronger than Your gates against my force.

Yet, for I loved thee, Take this along, I writ it for thy sake Gives a letter And would have rent it.

Another word, Menenius, I will not hear thee speak.

This man, Aufidius, Was my beloved in Rome: yet thou behold'st! You keep a constant temper.

Now, sir, is your name Menenius? 'Tis a spell, you see, of much  power: you know the way home again.

He that hath a will to die by himself fears it not from another: let your general do his worst.

For you, be that you are, long, and your misery increase with your age! I say to you, as I was said to, Away! A noble fellow, I warrant him.

The worthy fellow is our general: he's the rock, the oak not to be wind-shaken.

We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow Set down our host.

My partner in this action, You must report to the Volscian lords, how plainly I have borne this business.

Only their ends You have respected, stopp'd your ears against The general suit of Rome, never admitted A private whisper, no, not with such friends That thought them sure of you.

This last old man, Whom with a crack'd heart I have sent to Rome, Loved me above the measure of a father, Nay, godded me, indeed.

Ha! what shout is this? Shout within Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow In the same time 'tis made? I will not.

My wife comes foremost, then the honour'd mould Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand The grandchild to her blood.

But, out, affection! All bond and privilege of nature, break! Let it be virtuous to be obstinate.

What is that curt'sy worth? or those doves' eyes, Which can make gods forsworn? I melt, and am not Of stronger earth than others.

My mother bows, As if Olympus to a molehill should In supplication nod: and my young boy Hath an aspect of intercession, which Great nature cries 'Deny not.

let the Volsces Plough Rome and harrow Italy: I'll never Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand, As if a man were author of himself And knew no other kin.

My lord and husband! These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.

The sorrow that delivers us thus changed Makes you think so.

Like a dull actor now, I have forgot my part, and I am out, Even to a full disgrace.

Best of my flesh, Forgive my tyranny, but do not say For that 'Forgive our Romans.

O, a kiss Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge! Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss I carried from thee, dear, and my true lip Hath virgin'd it e'er since.

You gods! I prate, And the most noble mother of the world Leave unsaluted: sink, my knee, i' the earth, Of thy deep duty more impression show Than that of common sons.

O, stand up blest! Whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint, I kneel before thee, and unproperly Show duty, as mistaken all this while Between the child and parent.

That's my brave boy! Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself, Are suitors to you.

I beseech you, peace: Or, if you'ld ask, remember this before: The thing I have forsworn to grant may never Be held by you denials.

Do not bid me Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate Again with Rome's mechanics: tell me not Wherein I seem unnatural: desire not To ally my rages and revenges with Your colder reasons.

Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark, for we'll Hear nought from Rome in private.

Your request? Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment And state of bodies would bewray what life We have led since thy exile.

And to poor we Thine enmity's most capital: thou barr'st us Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort That all but we enjoy, for how can we, Alas, how can we for our country pray.

Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory, Whereto we are bound? alack, or we must lose The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person, Our comfort in the country.

Ay, and mine, That brought you forth this boy, to keep your name Living to time.

A' shall not tread on me, I'll run away till I am bigger, but then I'll fight.

Not of a woman's tenderness to be, Requires nor child nor woman's face to see.

Why dost not speak? Think'st thou it honourable for a noble man Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you: He cares not for your weeping.

Speak thou, boy: Perhaps thy childishness will move him more Than can our reasons.

There's no man in the world More bound to 's mother, yet here he lets me prate Like one i' the stocks.

Thou hast never in thy life Show'd thy dear mother any courtesy, When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood, Has cluck'd thee to the wars and safely home, Loaden with honour.

Say my request's unjust, And spurn me back: but if it be not so, Thou art not honest, and the gods will plague thee, That thou restrain'st from me the duty which To a mother's part belongs.

He turns away: Down, ladies, let us shame him with our knees.

To his surname Coriolanus 'longs more pride Than pity to our prayers.

Down: an end, This is the last: so we will home to Rome, And die among our neighbours.

Nay, behold 's: This boy, that cannot tell what he would have But kneels and holds up bands for fellowship, Does reason our petition with more strength Than thou hast to deny 't.

Come, let us go: This fellow had a Volscian to his mother, His wife is in Corioli and his child Like him by chance.

Yet give us our dispatch: I am hush'd until our city be a-fire, And then I'll speak a little.

He holds her by the hand, silent O mother, mother! What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope, The gods look down, and this unnatural scene They laugh at.

O my mother, mother! O! You have won a happy victory to Rome, But, for your son,--believe it, O, believe it, Most dangerously you have with him prevail'd, If not most mortal to him.

But, let it come. Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars, I'll frame convenient peace.

Now, good Aufidius, Were you in my stead, would you have heard A mother less? or granted less, Aufidius? I was moved withal.

I dare be sworn you were: And, sir, it is no little thing to make Mine eyes to sweat compassion.

But, good sir, What peace you'll make, advise me: for my part, I'll not to Rome, I'll back with you, and pray you, Stand to me in this cause.

O mother! wife! thy honour At difference in thee: out of that I'll work Myself a former fortune.

Ladies, you deserve To have a temple built you: all the swords In Italy, and her confederate arms, Could not have made this peace.

But I say there is no hope in't: our throats are sentenced and stay upon execution.

Is't possible that so short a time can alter the condition of a man! There is differency between a grub and a butterfly, yet your butterfly was a grub.

This Marcius is grown from man to dragon: he has wings, he's more than a creeping thing.

So did he me: and he no more remembers his mother now than an eight-year-old horse.

He sits in his state, as a thing made for Alexander.

What he bids be done is finished with his bidding.

He wants nothing of a god but eternity and a heaven to throne in.

When we banished him, we respected not them, and, he returning to break our necks, they respect not us.

What's the news? Good news, good news, the ladies have prevail'd, The Volscians are dislodged, and Marcius gone: A merrier day did never yet greet Rome, No, not the expulsion of the Tarquins.

Why, hark you! Trumpets, hautboys, drums beat, all together The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fifes, Tabours and cymbals and the shouting Romans, Make the sun dance.

Hark you! A shout within This is good news: I will go meet the ladies.

This Volumnia Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians, A city full, of tribunes, such as you, A sea and land full.

You have pray'd well to-day: This morning for ten thousand of your throats I'd not have given a doit.

Hark, how they joy! Music still, with shouts First, the gods bless you for your tidings, next, Accept my thankfulness.

Sir, we have all Great cause to give great thanks.

Him I accuse The city ports by this hath enter'd and Intends to appear before the people, hoping To purge herself with words: dispatch.

Most welcome! How is it with our general? Even so As with a man by his own alms empoison'd, And with his charity slain.

Most noble sir, If you do hold the same intent wherein You wish'd us parties, we'll deliver you Of your great danger.

Sir, I cannot tell: We must proceed as we do find the people.

The people will remain uncertain whilst 'Twixt you there's difference, but the fall of either Makes the survivor heir of all.

I know it, And my pretext to strike at him admits A good construction.

At a few drops of women's rheum, which are As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour Of our great action: therefore shall he die, And I'll renew me in his fall.

But, hark! Drums and trumpets sound, with great shouts of the People Your native town you enter'd like a post, And had no welcomes home: but he returns, Splitting the air with noise.

And patient fools, Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear With giving him glory.

Therefore, at your vantage, Ere he express himself, or move the people With what he would say, let him feel your sword, Which we will second.

When he lies along, After your way his tale pronounced shall bury His reasons with his body.

But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused What I have written to you? We have.

Hail, lords! I am return'd your soldier, No more infected with my country's love Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting Under your great command.

You are to know That prosperously I have attempted and With bloody passage led your wars even to The gates of Rome.

Our spoils we have brought home Do more than counterpoise a full third part The charges of the action.

Read it not, noble lords, But tell the traitor, in the high'st degree He hath abused your powers.

Hear'st thou, Mars? Name not the god, thou boy of tears! No more.

Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart Too great for what contains it.

Boy! O slave! Pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever I was forced to scold.

Your judgments, my grave lords, Must give this cur the lie: and his own notion-- Who wears my stripes impress'd upon him, that Must bear my beating to his grave--shall join To thrust the lie unto him.

Cut me to pieces, Volsces, men and lads, Stain all your edges on me.

Boy! false hound! If you have writ your annals true, 'tis there, That, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I Flutter'd your Volscians in Corioli: Alone I did it.

Boy! Why, noble lords, Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune, Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart, 'Fore your own eyes and ears? Let him die for't.

'He killed my father.' Peace, ho! no outrage: peace! The man is noble and his fame folds-in This orb o' the earth.

His last offences to us Shall have judicious hearing.

O Tullus,-- Thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep.

My lords, when you shall know--as in this rage, Provoked by him, you cannot--the great danger Which this man's life did owe you, you'll rejoice That he is thus cut off.

Please it your honours To call me to your senate, I'll deliver Myself your loyal servant, or endure Your heaviest censure.

Bear from hence his body, And mourn you for him: let him be regarded As the most noble corse that ever herald Did follow to his urn.

His own impatience Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame.

Take him up. Help, three o' the chiefest soldiers, I'll be one.

Beat thou the drum, that it speak mournfully: Trail your steel pikes.

Though in this city he Hath widow'd and unchilded many a one, Which to this hour bewail the injury, Yet he shall have a noble memory.

Assist. You do not meet a man but frowns: our bloods No more obey the heavens than our courtiers Still seem as does the king.

I do not think So fair an outward and such stuff within Endows a man but he.

I do extend him, sir, within himself, Crush him together rather than unfold His measure duly.

But, pray you, tell me, Is she sole child to the king? His only child.

We must forbear: here comes the gentleman, The queen, and princess.

No, be assured you shall not find me, daughter, After the slander of most stepmothers, Evil-eyed unto you: you're my prisoner, but Your gaoler shall deliver you the keys That lock up your restraint.

I'll fetch a turn about the garden, pitying The pangs of barr'd affections, though the king Hath charged you should not speak together.

My queen! my mistress! O lady, weep no more, lest I give cause To be suspected of more tenderness Than doth become a man.

Re-enter QUEEN Be brief, I pray you: If the king come, I shall incur I know not How much of his displeasure.

Yet I'll move him To walk this way: I never do him wrong, But he does buy my injuries, to be friends, Pays dear for my offences.

Should we be taking leave As long a term as yet we have to live, The loathness to depart would grow.

Adieu! Nay, stay a little: Were you but riding forth to air yourself, Such parting were too petty.

Look here, love, This diamond was my mother's: take it, heart, But keep it till you woo another wife, When Imogen is dead.

How, how! another? You gentle gods, give me but this I have, And sear up my embracements from a next With bonds of death! Putting on the ring Remain, remain thou here While sense can keep it on.

The gods protect you! And bless the good remainders of the court! I am gone.

There cannot be a pinch in death More sharp than this is.

O disloyal thing, That shouldst repair my youth, thou heap'st A year's age on me.

I beseech you, sir, Harm not yourself with your vexation I am senseless of your wrath, a touch more rare Subdues all pangs, all fears.

Past grace? obedience? Past hope, and in despair, that way, past grace.

That mightst have had the sole son of my queen! O blest, that I might not! I chose an eagle, And did avoid a puttock.

Thou took'st a beggar, wouldst have made my throne A seat for baseness.

O thou vile one! It is your fault that I have loved Posthumus: You bred him as my playfellow, and he is A man worth any woman, overbuys me Almost the sum he pays.

Peace, Dear lady daughter, peace! Sweet sovereign, Leave us to ourselves, and make yourself some comfort Out of your best advice.

Nay, let her languish A drop of blood a day, and, being aged, Die of this folly! Fie! you must give way.

How now, sir! What news? My lord your son drew on my master.

No harm, I trust, is done? There might have been, But that my master rather play'd than fought And had no help of anger: they were parted By gentlemen at hand.

To draw upon an exile! O brave sir! I would they were in Afric both together, Myself by with a needle, that I might prick The goer-back.

Why came you from your master? On his command: he would not suffer me To bring him to the haven, left these notes Of what commands I should be subject to, When 't pleased you to employ me.

This hath been Your faithful servant: I dare lay mine honour He will remain so.

About some half-hour hence, I pray you, speak with me: you shall at least Go see my lord aboard: for this time leave me.

Sir, I would advise you to shift a shirt, the violence of action hath made you reek as a sacrifice: where air comes out, air comes in: there's none abroad so wholesome as that you vent.

Have I hurt him? Hurt him! his body's a passable carcass, if he be not hurt: it is a thoroughfare for steel, if it be not hurt.

Stand you! You have land enough of your own: but he added to your having, gave you some ground.

And that she should love this fellow and refuse me! is damned.

Sir, as I told you always, her beauty and her brain go not together: she's a good sign, but I have seen small reflection of her wit.

Would there had been some hurt done! of an ass, which is no great hurt.

I would thou grew'st unto the shores o' the haven, And question'dst every sail: if he should write And not have it, 'twere a paper lost, As offer'd mercy is.

What was the last That he spake to thee? It was his queen, his queen! Then waved his handkerchief? And kiss'd it, madam.

Thou shouldst have made him As little as a crow, or less, ere left To after-eye him.

But, good Pisanio, When shall we hear from him? Be assured, madam, With his next vantage.

You speak of him when he was less furnished than now he is with that which makes him both without and within.

I have seen him in France: we had very many there could behold the sun with as firm eyes as he.

This matter of marrying his king's daughter, wherein he must be weighed rather by her value than his own, words him, I doubt not, a great deal from the matter.

But how comes it he is to sojourn with you? How creeps His father and I were soldiers together, to whom I have been often bound for no less than my life.

Here comes the Briton: let him be so entertained amongst you as suits, with gentlemen of your knowing, to a stranger of his quality.

I beseech you all, be better known to this gentleman, whom I commend to you as a noble friend of mine: how worthy he is I will leave to appear hereafter, rather than story him in his own hearing.

Since when I have been debtor to you for courtesies, which I will be ever to pay and yet pay still.

'Faith, yes, to be put to the arbitrement of swords, and by such two that would by all likelihood have confounded one the other, or have fallen both.

Can we, with manners, ask what was the difference? Safely, I think: 'twas a contention in public, which may, without contradiction, suffer the report.

That lady is not now living, or this gentleman's opinion by this worn out.

You must not so far prefer her 'fore ours of Italy.

Being so far provoked as I was in France, I would abate her nothing, though I profess myself her adorer, not her friend.

As fair and as good--a kind of hand-in-hand comparison--had been something too fair and too good for any lady in Britain.

If she went before others I have seen, as that diamond of yours outlustres many I have beheld.

I could not but believe she excelled many: but I have not seen the most precious diamond that is, nor you the lady.

What do you esteem it at? More than the world enjoys.

Either your unparagoned mistress is dead, or she's outprized by a trifle.

You are mistaken: the one may be sold, or given, if there were wealth enough for the purchase, or merit for the gift: the other is not a thing for sale, and only the gift of the gods.

Which the gods have given you? Which, by their graces, I will keep.

You may wear her in title yours: but, you know, strange fowl light upon neighbouring ponds.

Your Italy contains none so accomplished a courtier to convince the honour of my mistress, if, in the holding or loss of that, you term her frail.

I do nothing doubt you have store of thieves, notwithstanding, I fear not my ring.

This worthy signior, I thank him, makes no stranger of me, we are familiar at first.

With five times so much conversation, I should get ground of your fair mistress, make her go back, even to the yielding, had I admittance and opportunity to friend.

You are a great deal abused in too bold a persuasion, and I doubt not you sustain what you're worthy of by your attempt.

What's that? A repulse: though your attempt, as you call it, deserve more, a punishment too.

Gentlemen, enough of this: it came in too suddenly, let it die as it was born, and, I pray you, be better acquainted.

Would I had put my estate and my neighbour's on the approbation of what I have spoke! What lady would you choose to assail? Yours, whom in constancy you think stands so safe.

I will wage against your gold, gold to it: my ring I hold dear as my finger, 'tis part of it.

If you buy ladies' flesh at a million a dram, you cannot preserve it from tainting: but I see you have some religion in you, that you fear.

This is but a custom in your tongue, you bear a graver purpose, I hope.

I am the master of my speeches, and would undergo what's spoken, I swear.

I embrace these conditions, let us have articles betwixt us.

Will this hold, think you? Signior Iachimo will not from it.

Whiles yet the dew's on ground, gather those flowers, Make haste: who has the note of them? I, madam.

Your highness Shall from this practise but make hard your heart: Besides, the seeing these effects will be Both noisome and infectious.

Here comes a flattering rascal, upon him Will I first work: he's for his master, An enemy to my son.

How now, Pisanio! Doctor, your service for this time is ended, Take your own way.

Strange lingering poisons: I do know her spirit, And will not trust one of her malice with A drug of such damn'd nature.

She is fool'd With a most false effect, and I the truer, So to be false with her.

No further service, doctor, Until I send for thee.

Nay, I prethee, take it, It is an earnest of a further good That I mean to thee.

Tell thy mistress how The case stands with her, do't as from thyself.

A sly and constant knave, Not to be shaked, the agent for his master And the remembrancer of her to hold The hand-fast to her lord.

I have given him that Which, if he take, shall quite unpeople her Of liegers for her sweet, and which she after, Except she bend her humour, shall be assured To taste of too.

Re-enter PISANIO and Ladies So, so: well done, well done: The violets, cowslips, and the primroses, Bear to my closet.

And shall do: But when to my good lord I prove untrue, I'll choke myself: there's all I'll do for you.

Who may this be? Fie! Madam, a noble gentleman of Rome, Comes from my lord with letters.

Change you, madam? The worthy Leonatus is in safety And greets your highness dearly.

Presents a letter Thanks, good sir: You're kindly welcome.

If she be furnish'd with a mind so rare, She is alone the Arabian bird, and I Have lost the wager.

Boldness be my friend! Arm me, audacity, from head to foot! Or, like the Parthian, I shall flying fight, Rather directly fly.

Reflect upon him accordingly, as you value your trust-- So far I read aloud: But even the very middle of my heart Is warm'd by the rest, and takes it thankfully.

You are as welcome, worthy sir, as I Have words to bid you, and shall find it so In all that I can do.

What is the matter, trow? The cloyed will, That satiate yet unsatisfied desire, that tub Both fill'd and running, ravening first the lamb Longs after for the garbage.

What, dear sir, Thus raps you? Are you well? Thanks, madam, well.

To PISANIO Beseech you, sir, desire My man's abode where I did leave him: he Is strange and peevish.

Continues well my lord? His health, beseech you? Well, madam.

Exceeding pleasant, none a stranger there So merry and so gamesome: he is call'd The Briton reveller.

When he was here, He did incline to sadness, and oft-times Not knowing why.

Not he: but yet heaven's bounty towards him might Be used more thankfully.

In himself, 'tis much, In you, which I account his beyond all talents, Whilst I am bound to wonder, I am bound To pity too.

Why do you pity me? That others do-- I was about to say--enjoy your--But It is an office of the gods to venge it, Not mine to speak on 't.

Not I, Inclined to this intelligence, pronounce The beggary of his change, but 'tis your graces That from pay mutest conscience to my tongue Charms this report out.

O dearest soul! your cause doth strike my heart With pity, that doth make me sick.

I dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure, More noble than that runagate to your bed, And will continue fast to your affection, Still close as sure.

What, ho, Pisanio! Let me my service tender on your lips.

Away! I do condemn mine ears that have So long attended thee.

If thou wert honourable, Thou wouldst have told this tale for virtue, not For such an end thou seek'st,--as base as strange.

Thou wrong'st a gentleman, who is as far From thy report as thou from honour, and Solicit'st here a lady that disdains Thee and the devil alike.

What, ho, Pisanio! O happy Leonatus! I may say The credit that thy lady hath of thee Deserves thy trust, and thy most perfect goodness Her assured credit.

Blessed live you long! A lady to the worthiest sir that ever Country call'd his! and you his mistress, only For the most worthiest fit! Give me your pardon.

He sits 'mongst men like a descended god: He hath a kind of honour sets him off, More than a mortal seeming.

Pray, your pardon. All's well, sir: take my power i' the court for yours.

I had almost forgot To entreat your grace but in a small request, And yet of moment to, for it concerns Your lord, myself and other noble friends, Are partners in the business.

They are in a trunk, Attended by my men: I will make bold To send them to you, only for this night, I must aboard to-morrow.

Yes, I beseech, or I shall short my word By lengthening my return.

From Gallia I cross'd the seas on purpose and on promise To see your grace.

Send your trunk to me, it shall safe be kept, And truly yielded you.

What got he by that? You have broke his pate with your bowl.

When a gentleman is disposed to swear, it is not for any standers-by to curtail his oaths, ha? No my lord, nor crop the ears of them.

Sayest thou? It is not fit your lordship should undertake every companion that you give offence to.

No, I know that: but it is fit I should commit offence to my inferiors.

Did you hear of a stranger that's come to court to-night? A stranger, and I not know on't! There's an Italian come, and, 'tis thought, one of Leonatus' friends.

Leonatus! a banished rascal, and he's another, whatsoever he be.

Who told you of this stranger? One of your lordship's pages.

Is it fit I went to look upon him? is there no derogation in't? You cannot derogate, my lord.

Come, I'll go see this Italian: what I have lost to-day at bowls I'll win to-night of him.

That such a crafty devil as is his mother Should yield the world this ass! a woman that Bears all down with her brain, and this her son Cannot take two from twenty, for his heart, And leave eighteen.

IMOGEN in bed, reading, a Lady attending Who's there? my woman Helen? Please you, madam What hour is it? Almost midnight, madam.

Sleep hath seized me wholly To your protection I commend me, gods.

From fairies and the tempters of the night Guard me, beseech ye.

IACHIMO comes from the trunk The crickets sing, and man's o'er-labour'd sense Repairs itself by rest.

Our Tarquin thus Did softly press the rushes, ere he waken'd The chastity he wounded.

Ah, but some natural notes about her body, Above ten thousand meaner moveables Would testify, to enrich mine inventory.

No more. To what end? Why should I write this down, that's riveted, Screw'd to my memory? She hath been reading late The tale of Tereus, here the leaf's turn'd down Where Philomel gave up.

I have enough: To the trunk again, and shut the spring of it.

Swift, swift, you dragons of the night, that dawning May bare the raven's eye! I lodge in fear, Though this a heavenly angel, hell is here.

Clock strikes One, two, three: time, time! Goes into the trunk.

The scene closes An ante-chamber adjoining Imogen's apartments.

Your lordship is the most patient man in loss, the most coldest that ever turned up ace.

But not every man patient after the noble temper of your lordship.

You are most hot and furious when you win. Winning will put any man into courage.

If I could get this foolish Imogen, I should have gold enough.

I would this music would come: I am advised to give her music o' mornings, they say it will penetrate.

Come on, tune: if you can penetrate her with your fingering, so, we'll try with tongue too: if none will do, let her remain, but I'll never give o'er.

First, a very excellent good-conceited thing, after, a wonderful sweet air, with admirable rich words to it: and then let her consider.

If this penetrate, I will consider your music the better: if it do not, it is a vice in her ears, which horse-hairs and calves'-guts, nor the voice of unpaved eunuch to boot, can never amend.

I am glad I was up so late, for that's the reason I was up so early: he cannot choose but take this service I have done fatherly.

Good morrow to your majesty and to my gracious mother.

Attend you here the door of our stern daughter? Will she not forth? I have assailed her with music, but she vouchsafes no notice.

The exile of her minion is too new, She hath not yet forgot him: some more time Must wear the print of his remembrance out, And then she's yours.

You are most bound to the king, Who lets go by no vantages that may Prefer you to his daughter.

So like you, sir, ambassadors from Rome, The one is Caius Lucius.

Our dear son, When you have given good morning to your mistress, Attend the queen and us, we shall have need To employ you towards this Roman.

Come, our queen. If she be up, I'll speak with her, if not, Let her lie still and dream.

That's more Than some, whose tailors are as dear as yours, Can justly boast of.

What's your lordship's pleasure? Your lady's person: is she ready? To keep her chamber.

How! my good name? or to report of you What I shall think is good?--The princess! Good morrow, fairest: sister, your sweet hand.

You lay out too much pains For purchasing but trouble, the thanks I give Is telling you that I am poor of thanks And scarce can spare them.

If you but said so, 'twere as deep with me: If you swear still, your recompense is still That I regard it not.

But that you shall not say I yield being silent, I would not speak.

I pray you, spare me: 'faith, I shall unfold equal discourtesy To your best kindness: one of your great knowing Should learn, being taught, forbearance.

To leave you in your madness, 'twere my sin: I will not.

Do you call me fool? As I am mad, I do: If you'll be patient, I'll no more be mad, That cures us both.

You sin against Obedience, which you owe your father.

A hilding for a livery, a squire's cloth, A pantler, not so eminent.

The south-fog rot him! He never can meet more mischance than come To be but named of thee.

His meanest garment, That ever hath but clipp'd his body, is dearer In my respect than all the hairs above thee, Were they all made such men.

How now, Pisanio! 'His garment!' Now the devil-- To Dorothy my woman hie thee presently-- 'His garment!' I am sprited with a fool.

Frighted, and anger'd worse: go bid my woman Search for a jewel that too casually Hath left mine arm: it was thy master's: 'shrew me, If I would lose it for a revenue Of any king's in Europe.

I do think I saw't this morning: confident I am Last night 'twas on mine arm, I kiss'd it: I hope it be not gone to tell my lord That I kiss aught but he.

You have abused me: 'His meanest garment!' Ay, I said so, sir: If you will make't an action, call witness to't.

Your mother too: She's my good lady, and will conceive, I hope, But the worst of me.

Fear it not, sir: I would I were so sure To win the king as I am bold her honour Will remain hers.

Your very goodness and your company O'erpays all I can do.

See! Iachimo! The swiftest harts have posted you by land, And winds of all the comers kiss'd your sails, To make your vessel nimble.

I hope the briefness of your answer made The speediness of your return.

Your lady Is one of the fairest that I have look'd upon.

And therewithal the best, or let her beauty Look through a casement to allure false hearts And be false with them.

Was Caius Lucius in the Britain court When you were there? He was expected then, But not approach'd.

Sparkles this stone as it was wont? or is't not Too dull for your good wearing? If I had lost it, I should have lost the worth of it in gold.

I'll make a journey twice as far, to enjoy A second night of such sweet shortness which Was mine in Britain, for the ring is won.

Make not, sir, Your loss your sport: I hope you know that we Must not continue friends.

This is a thing Which you might from relation likewise reap, Being, as it is, much spoke of.

The roof o' the chamber With golden cherubins is fretted: her andirons-- I had forgot them--were two winking Cupids Of silver, each on one foot standing, nicely Depending on their brands.

This is her honour! Let it be granted you have seen all this--and praise Be given to your remembrance--the description Of what is in her chamber nothing saves The wager you have laid.

Then, if you can, Showing the bracelet Be pale: I beg but leave to air this jewel, see! And now 'tis up again: it must be married To that your diamond, I'll keep them.

She writes so to you, doth she? O, no, no, no! 'tis true.

Here, take this too, Gives the ring It is a basilisk unto mine eye, Kills me to look on't.

Back my ring: Render to me some corporal sign about her, More evident than this, for this was stolen.

You do remember This stain upon her? Ay, and it doth confirm Another stain, as big as hell can hold, Were there no more but it.

Will you hear more? Spare your arithmetic: never count the turns, Once, and a million! I'll be sworn-- No swearing.

If you will swear you have not done't, you lie, And I will kill thee, if thou dost deny Thou'st made me cuckold.

O, that I had her here, to tear her limb-meal! I will go there and do't, i' the court, before Her father.

I'll do something-- Quite besides The government of patience! You have won: Let's follow him, and pervert the present wrath He hath against himself.

I'll write against them, Detest them, curse them: yet 'tis greater skill In a true hate, to pray they have their will: The very devils cannot plague them better.

Britain is A world by itself, and we will nothing pay For wearing our own noses.

That opportunity Which then they had to take from 's, to resume We have again.

We have yet many among us can gripe as hard as Cassibelan: I do not say I am one, but I have a hand.

Why tribute? why should we pay tribute? If Caesar can hide the sun from us with a blanket, or put the moon in his pocket, we will pay him tribute for light, else, sir, no more tribute, pray you now.

Thy Caesar knighted me, my youth I spent Much under him, of him I gather'd honour, Which he to seek of me again, perforce, Behoves me keep at utterance.

I am perfect That the Pannonians and Dalmatians for Their liberties are now in arms, a precedent Which not to read would show the Britons cold: So Caesar shall not find them.

O my master! Thy mind to her is now as low as were Thy fortunes.

How! that I should murder her? Upon the love and truth and vows which I Have made to thy command? I, her? her blood? If it be so to do good service, never Let me be counted serviceable.

How look I, That I should seem to lack humanity so much as this fact comes to? 'Do't: the letter that I have sent her, by her own command Shall give thee opportunity.

O damn'd paper! Black as the ink that's on thee! Senseless bauble, Art thou a feodary for this act, and look'st So virgin-like without? Lo, here she comes.

How now, Pisanio! Madam, here is a letter from my lord.

Who? thy lord? that is my lord, Leonatus! O, learn'd indeed were that astronomer That knew the stars as I his characters, He'ld lay the future open.

Blest be You bees that make these locks of counsel! Lovers And men in dangerous bonds pray not alike: Though forfeiters you cast in prison, yet You clasp young Cupid's tables.

Good news, gods! 'Justice, and your father's wrath, should he take me in his dominion, could not be so cruel to me, as you, O the dearest of creatures, would even renew me with your eyes.

Take notice that I am in Cambria, at Milford-Haven: what your own love will out of this advise you, follow.

So he wishes you all happiness, that remains loyal to his vow, and your, increasing in love, LEONATUS POSTHUMUS.

O, for a horse with wings! Hear'st thou, Pisanio? He is at Milford-Haven: read, and tell me How far 'tis thither.

Prithee, speak, How many score of miles may we well ride 'Twixt hour and hour? One score 'twixt sun and sun, Madam, 's enough for you: and too much too.

Why, one that rode to's execution, man, Could never go so slow: I have heard of riding wagers, Where horses have been nimbler than the sands That run i' the clock's behalf.

But this is foolery: Go bid my woman feign a sickness, say She'll home to her father: and provide me presently A riding-suit, no costlier than would fit A franklin's housewife.

I see before me, man: nor here, nor here, Nor what ensues, but have a fog in them, That I cannot look through.

Away, I prithee, Do as I bid thee: there's no more to say, Accessible is none but Milford way.

Hail, thou fair heaven! We house i' the rock, yet use thee not so hardly As prouder livers do.

Hail, heaven! Hail, heaven! Now for our mountain sport: up to yond hill, Your legs are young, I'll tread these flats.

Out of your proof you speak: we, poor unfledged, Have never wing'd from view o' the nest, nor know not What air's from home.

I'll meet you in the valleys. How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature! These boys know little they are sons to the king, Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.

The younger brother, Cadwal, Once Arviragus, in as like a figure, Strikes life into my speech and shows much more His own conceiving.

Euriphile, Thou wast their nurse, they took thee for their mother, And every day do honour to her grave: Myself, Belarius, that am Morgan call'd, They take for natural father.

The game is up. Thou told'st me, when we came from horse, the place Was near at hand: ne'er long'd my mother so To see me first, as I have now.

What's the matter? Why tender'st thou that paper to me, with A look untender? If't be summer news, Smile to't before, if winterly, thou need'st But keep that countenance still.

My husband's hand! That drug-damn'd Italy hath out-craftied him, And he's at some hard point.

Speak, man: thy tongue May take off some extremity, which to read Would be even mortal to me.

Please you, read, And you shall find me, wretched man, a thing The most disdain'd of fortune.

strumpet in my bed, the testimonies whereof lie bleeding in me.

I speak not out of weak surmises, but from proof as strong as my grief and as certain as I expect my revenge.

That part thou, Pisanio, must act for me, if thy faith be not tainted with the breach of hers.

Let thine own hands take away her life: I shall give thee opportunity at Milford-Haven.

She hath my letter for the purpose where, if thou fear to strike and to make me certain it is done, thou art the pandar to her dishonour and equally to me disloyal.

What shall I need to draw my sword? the paper Hath cut her throat already.

Hence, vile instrument! Thou shalt not damn my hand.

Why, I must die, And if I do not by thy hand, thou art No servant of thy master's.

Against self-slaughter There is a prohibition so divine That cravens my weak hand.

Soft, soft! we'll no defence, Obedient as the scabbard.

What is here? The scriptures of the loyal Leonatus, All turn'd to heresy? Away, away, Corrupters of my faith! you shall no more Be stomachers to my heart.

Thus may poor fools Believe false teachers: though those that are betray'd Do feel the treason sharply, yet the traitor Stands in worse case of woe.

Prithee, dispatch: The lamb entreats the butcher: where's thy knife? Thou art too slow to do thy master's bidding, When I desire it too.

O gracious lady, Since I received command to do this business I have not slept one wink.

Why hast thou gone so far, To be unbent when thou hast ta'en thy stand, The elected deer before thee? But to win time To lose so bad employment, in the which I have consider'd of a course.

Talk thy tongue weary, speak I have heard I am a strumpet, and mine ear Therein false struck, can take no greater wound, Nor tent to bottom that.

But speak. Then, madam, I thought you would not back again.

Not so, neither: But if I were as wise as honest, then My purpose would prove well.

It cannot be But that my master is abused: Some villain, ay, and singular in his art.

I'll give but notice you are dead and send him Some bloody sign of it, for 'tis commanded I should do so: you shall be miss'd at court, And that will well confirm it.

If not at court, Then not in Britain must you bide.

O, for such means! Though peril to my modesty, not death on't, I would adventure.

Nay, be brief I see into thy end, and am almost A man already.

Your means abroad, You have me, rich, and I will never fail Beginning nor supplyment.

Thou art all the comfort The gods will diet me with.

Prithee, away: There's more to be consider'd, but we'll even All that good time will give us: this attempt I am soldier to, and will abide it with A prince's courage.

Away, I prithee. Well, madam, we must take a short farewell, Lest, being miss'd, I be suspected of Your carriage from the court.

My noble mistress, Here is a box, I had it from the queen: What's in't is precious, if you are sick at sea, Or stomach-qualm'd at land, a dram of this Will drive away distemper.

May the gods Direct you to the best! Amen: I thank thee.

My emperor hath wrote, I must from hence, And am right sorry that I must report ye My master's enemy.

Our subjects, sir, Will not endure his yoke, and for ourself To show less sovereignty than they, must needs Appear unkinglike.

So, sir: I desire of you A conduct over-land to Milford-Haven.

Madam, all joy befal your grace! And you! My lords, you are appointed for that office, The due of honour in no point omit.

Receive it friendly, but from this time forth I wear it as your enemy.

Sir, the event Is yet to name the winner: fare you well.

Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my lords, Till he have cross'd the Severn.

Happiness! He goes hence frowning: but it honours us That we have given him cause.

'Tis all the better, Your valiant Britons have their wishes in it.

Lucius hath wrote already to the emperor How it goes here.

It fits us therefore ripely Our chariots and our horsemen be in readiness: The powers that he already hath in Gallia Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves His war for Britain.

'Tis not sleepy business, But must be look'd to speedily and strongly.

Our expectation that it would be thus Hath made us forward.

Call her before us, for We have been too slight in sufferance.

Royal sir, Since the exile of Posthumus, most retired Hath her life been, the cure whereof, my lord, 'Tis time must do.

Beseech your majesty, Forbear sharp speeches to her: she's a lady So tender of rebukes that words are strokes And strokes death to her.

Re-enter Attendant Where is she, sir? How Can her contempt be answer'd? Please you, sir, Her chambers are all lock'd, and there's no answer That will be given to the loudest noise we make.

Her doors lock'd? Not seen of late? Grant, heavens, that which I fear Prove false! Son, I say, follow the king.

That man of hers, Pisanio, her old servant, have not seen these two days.

Pisanio, thou that stand'st so for Posthumus! He hath a drug of mine, I pray his absence Proceed by swallowing that, for he believes It is a thing most precious.

Re-enter CLOTEN How now, my son! 'Tis certain she is fled.

Go in and cheer the king: he rages, none Dare come about him.

For when fools Shall-- Who is here? What, are you packing, sirrah? Come hither: ah, you precious pander! Villain, Where is thy lady? In a word, or else Thou art straightway with the fiends.

O, good my lord! Where is thy lady? Or, by Jupiter,-- I will not ask again.

Close villain, I'll have this secret from thy heart, or rip Thy heart to find it.

Is she with Posthumus? From whose so many weights of baseness cannot A dram of worth be drawn.

Alas, my lord, How can she be with him? When was she missed? He is in Rome.

Where is she, sir? Come nearer, No further halting: satisfy me home What is become of her.

O, my all-worthy lord! All-worthy villain! Discover where thy mistress is at once, At the next word: no more of 'worthy lord!' Speak, or thy silence on the instant is Thy condemnation and thy death.

Then, sir, This paper is the history of my knowledge Touching her flight.

She's far enough, and what he learns by this May prove his travel, not her danger.

Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again! Sirrah, is this letter true? Sir, as I think.

Hast any of thy late master's garments in thy possession? I have, my lord, at my lodging, the same suit he wore when he took leave of my lady and mistress.

The first service thou dost me, fetch that suit hither: let it be thy lint service, go.

Meet thee at Milford-Haven!--I forgot to ask him one thing, I'll remember't anon:--even there, thou villain Posthumus, will I kill thee.

With that suit upon my back, will I ravish her: first kill him, and in her eyes, there shall she see my valour, which will then be a torment to her contempt.

She hath despised me rejoicingly, and I'll be merry in my revenge.

Re-enter PISANIO, with the clothes Be those the garments? Ay, my noble lord.

How long is't since she went to Milford-Haven? She can scarce be there yet.

Bring this apparel to my chamber, that is the second thing that I have commanded thee: the third is, that thou wilt be a voluntary mute to my design.

Be but duteous, and true preferment shall tender itself to thee.

My revenge is now at Milford: would I had wings to follow it! Come, and be true.

Thou bid'st me to my loss: for true to thee Were to prove false, which I will never be, To him that is most true.

To Milford go, And find not her whom thou pursuest.

I should be sick, But that my resolution helps me.

Milford, When from the mountain-top Pisanio show'd thee, Thou wast within a ken: O Jove! I think Foundations fly the wretched, such, I mean, Where they should be relieved.

Two beggars told me I could not miss my way: will poor folks lie, That have afflictions on them, knowing 'tis A punishment or trial? Yes, no wonder, When rich ones scarce tell true.

To lapse in fulness Is sorer than to lie for need, and falsehood Is worse in kings than beggars.

Now I think on thee, My hunger's gone, but even before, I was At point to sink for food.

Ho! who's here? If any thing that's civil, speak, if savage, Take or lend.

Ho! No answer? Then I'll enter. Best draw my sword: and if mine enemy But fear the sword like me, he'll scarcely look on't.

Come, our stomachs Will make what's homely savoury: weariness Can snore upon the flint, when resty sloth Finds the down pillow hard.

Now peace be here, Poor house, that keep'st thyself! I am thoroughly weary.

There is cold meat i' the cave, we'll browse on that, Whilst what we have kill'd be cook'd.

But that it eats our victuals, I should think Here were a fairy.

Here's money for my meat: I would have left it on the board so soon As I had made my meal, and parted With prayers for the provider.

Money, youth? All gold and silver rather turn to dirt! As 'tis no better reckon'd, but of those Who worship dirty gods.

I see you're angry: Know, if you kill me for my fault, I should Have died had I not made it.

I have a kinsman who Is bound for Italy, he embark'd at Milford, To whom being going, almost spent with hunger, I am fall'n in this offence.

Prithee, fair youth, Think us no churls, nor measure our good minds By this rude place we live in.

Well encounter'd! 'Tis almost night: you shall have better cheer Ere you depart: and thanks to stay and eat it.

Were you a woman, youth, I should woo hard but be your groom.

I'll make't my comfort He is a man, I'll love him as my brother: And such a welcome as I'd give to him After long absence, such is yours: most welcome! Be sprightly, for you fall 'mongst friends.

Would it had been so, that they Had been my father's sons! then had my prize Been less, and so more equal ballasting To thee, Posthumus.

Would I could free't! Or I, whate'er it be, What pain it cost, what danger.

Pardon me, gods! I'd change my sex to be companion with them, Since Leonatus's false.

Fair youth, come in: Discourse is heavy, fasting, when we have supp'd, We'll mannerly demand thee of thy story, So far as thou wilt speak it.

The night to the owl and morn to the lark less welcome.

He creates Lucius preconsul: and to you the tribunes, For this immediate levy, he commends His absolute commission.

I am near to the place where they should meet, if Pisanio have mapped it truly.

My horse is tied up safe: out, sword, and to a sore purpose! Fortune, put them into my hand! This is the very description of their meeting-place, and the fellow dares not deceive me.

Are we not brothers? So man and man should be, But clay and clay differs in dignity, Whose dust is both alike.

I am very sick. Go you to hunting, I'll abide with him.

So sick I am not, yet I am not well, But not so citizen a wanton as To seem to die ere sick: so please you, leave me, Stick to your journal course: the breach of custom Is breach of all.

I am ill, but your being by me Cannot amend me, society is no comfort To one not sociable: I am not very sick, Since I can reason of it.

Pray you, trust me here: I'll rob none but myself, and let me die, Stealing so poorly.

I love thee, I have spoke it How much the quantity, the weight as much, As I do love my father.

O worthiness of nature! breed of greatness! Cowards father cowards and base things sire base: Nature hath meal and bran, contempt and grace.

I'm not their father, yet who this should be, Doth miracle itself, loved before me.

Swallows some I could not stir him: He said he was gentle, but unfortunate, Dishonestly afflicted, but yet honest.

Thus did he answer me: yet said, hereafter I might know more.

To the field, to the field! We'll leave you for this time: go in and rest.

This youth, how'er distress'd, appears he hath had Good ancestors.

How angel-like he sings! But his neat cookery! he cut our roots In characters, And sauced our broths, as Juno had been sick And he her dieter.

I do note That grief and patience, rooted in him both, Mingle their spurs together.

Grow, patience! And let the stinking elder, grief, untwine His perishing root with the increasing vine! It is great morning.

Come, away!-- Who's there? I cannot find those runagates, that villain Hath mock'd me.

I am faint. 'Those runagates!' Means he not us? I partly know him: 'tis Cloten, the son o' the queen.

I fear some ambush. I saw him not these many years, and yet I know 'tis he.

We are held as outlaws: hence! He is but one: you and my brother search What companies are near: pray you, away, Let me alone with him.

Soft! What are you That fly me thus? some villain mountaineers? I have heard of such.

What slave art thou? A thing More slavish did I ne'er than answering A slave without a knock.

Thou art a robber, A law-breaker, a villain: yield thee, thief.

To who? to thee? What art thou? Have not I An arm as big as thine? a heart as big? Thy words, I grant, are bigger, for I wear not My dagger in my mouth.

Hence, then, and thank The man that gave them thee.

Thou injurious thief, Hear but my name, and tremble.

Cloten, thou double villain, be thy name, I cannot tremble at it: were it Toad, or Adder, Spider, 'Twould move me sooner.

To thy further fear, Nay, to thy mere confusion, thou shalt know I am son to the queen.

I am sorry for 't, not seeming So worthy as thy birth.

Art not afeard? Those that I reverence those I fear, the wise: At fools I laugh, not fear them.

Die the death: When I have slain thee with my proper hand, I'll follow those that even now fled hence, And on the gates of Lud's-town set your heads: Yield, rustic mountaineer.

Re-enter BELARIUS and ARVIRAGUS No companies abroad? None in the world: you did mistake him, sure.

In this place we left them: I wish my brother make good time with him, You say he is so fell.

Being scarce made up, I mean, to man, he had not apprehension Of roaring terrors, for the effect of judgment Is oft the cause of fear.

Let ordinance Come as the gods foresay it: howsoe'er, My brother hath done well.

I had no mind To hunt this day: the boy Fidele's sickness Did make my way long forth.

I fear 'twill be revenged: Would, Polydote, thou hadst not done't! though valour Becomes thee well enough.

Well, 'tis done: We'll hunt no more to-day, nor seek for danger Where there's no profit.

I prithee, to our rock, You and Fidele play the cooks: I'll stay Till hasty Polydote return, and bring him To dinner presently.

Poor sick Fidele! I'll weringly to him: to gain his colour I'ld let a parish of such Clotens' blood, And praise myself for charity.

Yet still it's strange What Cloten's being here to us portends, Or what his death will bring us.

Re-enter GUIDERIUS Where's my brother? I have sent Cloten's clotpoll down the stream, In embassy to his mother: his body's hostage For his return.

Solemn music My ingenious instrument! Hark, Polydore, it sounds! But what occasion Hath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark! Is he at home? He went hence even now.

What does he mean? since death of my dear'st mother it did not speak before.

The matter? Triumphs for nothing and lamenting toys Is jollity for apes and grief for boys.

Is Cadwal mad? Look, here he comes, And brings the dire occasion in his arms Of what we blame him for.

Re-enter ARVIRAGUS, with IMOGEN, as dead, bearing her in his arms The bird is dead That we have made so much on.

I had rather Have skipp'd from sixteen years of age to sixty, To have turn'd my leaping-time into a crutch, Than have seen this.

O sweetest, fairest lily! My brother wears thee not the one half so well As when thou grew'st thyself.

How found you him? Stark, as you see: Thus smiling, as some fly hid tickled slumber, Not as death's dart, being laugh'd at, his right cheek Reposing on a cushion.

O' the floor, His arms thus leagued: I thought he slept, and put My clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness Answer'd my steps too loud.

Why, he but sleeps: If he be gone, he'll make his grave a bed, With female fairies will his tomb be haunted, And worms will not come to thee.

Prithee, have done, And do not play in wench-like words with that Which is so serious.

Let us bury him, And not protract with admiration what Is now due debt.

To the grave! Say, where shall's lay him? By good Euriphile, our mother.

Be't so: And let us, Polydore, though now our voices Have got the mannish crack, sing him to the ground, As once our mother, use like note and words, Save that Euriphile must be Fidele.

I cannot sing: I'll weep, and word it with thee, For notes of sorrow out of tune are worse Than priests and fanes that lie.

Great griefs, I see, medicine the less, for Cloten Is quite forgot.

Our foe was princely And though you took his life, as being our foe, Yet bury him as a prince.

Thersites' body is as good as Ajax', When neither are alive.

If you'll go fetch him, We'll say our song the whilst.

Brother, begin. Nay, Cadwal, we must lay his head to the east, My father hath a reason for't.

Here's a few flowers, but 'bout midnight, more: The herbs that have on them cold dew o' the night Are strewings fitt'st for graves.

Upon their faces. You were as flowers, now wither'd: even so These herblets shall, which we upon you strew.

The ground that gave them first has them again: Their pleasures here are past, so is their pain.

-By yond bush?--Pray, how far thither? 'Ods pittikins! can it be six mile yet?-- I have gone all night.

'Faith, I'll lie down and sleep. But, soft! no bedfellow!--O god s and goddesses! Seeing the body of CLOTEN These flowers are like the pleasures of the world, This bloody man, the care on't.

Pisanio, All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks, And mine to boot, be darted on thee! Thou, Conspired with that irregulous devil, Cloten, Hast here cut off my lord.

How should this be? Pisanio? 'Tis he and Cloten: malice and lucre in them Have laid this woe here.

When expect you them? With the next benefit o' the wind.

Command our present numbers Be muster'd, bid the captains look to't.

Soft, ho! what trunk is here Without his top? The ruin speaks that sometime It was a worthy building.

How! a page! Or dead, or sleeping on him? But dead rather, For nature doth abhor to make his bed With the defunct, or sleep upon the dead.

Young one, Inform us of thy fortunes, for it seems They crave to be demanded.

This was my master, A very valiant Briton and a good, That here by mountaineers lies slain.

Alas! There is no more such masters: I may wander From east to occident, cry out for service, Try many, all good, serve truly, never Find such another master.

'Lack, good youth! Thou movest no less with thy complaining than Thy master in bleeding: say his name, good friend.

If I do lie and do No harm by it, though the gods hear, I hope They'll pardon it.

Thou dost approve thyself the very same: Thy name well fits thy faith, thy faith thy name.

Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not say Thou shalt be so well master'd, but, be sure, No less beloved.

The Roman emperor's letters, Sent by a consul to me, should not sooner Than thine own worth prefer thee: go with me.

Ay, good youth! And rather father thee than master thee.

My friends, The boy hath taught us manly duties: let us Find out the prettiest daisied plot we can, And make him with our pikes and partisans A grave: come, arm him.

Boy, he is preferr'd By thee to us, and he shall be interr'd As soldiers can.

Be cheerful, wipe thine eyes Some falls are means the happier to arise.

A fever with the absence of her son, A madness, of which her life's in danger.

But for thee, fellow, Who needs must know of her departure and Dost seem so ignorant, we'll enforce it from thee By a sharp torture.

Sir, my life is yours, I humbly set it at your will, but, for my mistress, I nothing know where she remains, why gone, Nor when she purposes return.

Beseech your highness, Hold me your loyal servant.

Good my liege, The day that she was missing he was here: I dare be bound he's true and shall perform All parts of his subjection loyally.

For Cloten, There wants no diligence in seeking him, And will, no doubt, be found.

To PISANIO We'll slip you for a season, but our jealousy Does yet depend.

So please your majesty, The Roman legions, all from Gallia drawn, Are landed on your coast, with a supply Of Roman gentlemen, by the senate sent.

Now for the counsel of my son and queen! I am amazed with matter.

Good my liege, Your preparation can affront no less Than what you hear of: come more, for more you're ready: The want is but to put those powers in motion That long to move.

We fear not What can from Italy annoy us, but We grieve at chances here.

The heavens still must work. Wherein I am false I am honest, not true, to be true.

These present wars shall find I love my country, Even to the note o' the king, or I'll fall in them.

All other doubts, by time let them be clear'd: Fortune brings in some boats that are not steer'd.

This is, sir, a doubt In such a time nothing becoming you, Nor satisfying us.

O, I am known Of many in the army: many years, Though Cloten then but young, you see, not wore him From my remembrance.

Pray, sir, to the army: I and my brother are not known, yourself So out of thought, and thereto so o'ergrown, Cannot be question'd.

By heavens, I'll go: If you will bless me, sir, and give me leave, I'll take the better care, but if you will not, The hazard therefore due fall on me by The hands of Romans! So say I	amen.

No reason I, since of your lives you set So slight a valuation, should reserve My crack'd one to more care.

Have with you, boys! If in your country wars you chance to die, That is my bed too, lads, an there I'll lie: Lead, lead.

The time seems long, their blood thinks scorn, Till it fly out and show them princes born.

Yea, bloody cloth, I'll keep thee, for I wish'd Thou shouldst be colour'd thus.

Gods! if you Should have ta'en vengeance on my faults, I never Had lived to put on this: so had you saved The noble Imogen to repent, and struck Me, wretch more worth your vengeance.

But, alack, You snatch some hence for little faults, that's love, To have them fall no more: you some permit To second ills with ills, each elder worse, And make them dread it, to the doers' thrift.

Let me make men know More valour in me than my habits show.

Gods, put the strength o' the Leonati in me! To shame the guise o' the world, I will begin The fashion, less without and more within.

If that thy gentry, Britain, go before This lout as he exceeds our lords, the odds Is that we scarce are men and you are gods.

Stand, stand, and fight! Re-enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS, and seconds the  Britons: they rescue CYMBELINE, and exeunt.

Then re-enter LUCIUS, and IACHIMO, with IMOGEN Away, boy, from the troops, and save thyself, For friends kill friends, and the disorder's such As war were hoodwink'd.

It is a day turn'd strangely: or betimes Let's reinforce, or fly.

Camest thou from where they made the stand? I did.

Stand, Or we are Romans and will give you that Like beasts which you shun beastly, and may save, But to look back in frown: stand, stand.

This was strange chance A narrow lane, an old man, and two boys.

Nay, do not wonder at it: you are made Rather to wonder at the things you hear Than to work any.

Will you rhyme upon't, And vent it for a mockery? Here is one: 'Two boys, an old man twice a boy, a lane, Preserved the Britons, was the Romans' bane.

'Lack, to what end? Who dares not stand his foe, I'll be his friend, For if he'll do as he is made to do, I know he'll quickly fly my friendship too.

Great the slaughter is Here made by the Roman, great the answer be Britons must take.

For me, my ransom's death, On either side I come to spend my breath, Which neither here I'll keep nor bear again, But end it by some means for Imogen.

'Tis thought the old man and his sons were angels.

There was a fourth man, in a silly habit, That gave the affront with them.

Stand! who's there? A Roman, Who had not now been drooping here, if seconds Had answer'd him.

Lay hands on him, a dog! A leg of Rome shall not return to tell What crows have peck'd them here.

He brags his service As if he were of note: bring him to the king.

You shall not now be stol'n, you have locks upon you, So graze as you find pasture.

Must I repent? I cannot do it better than in gyves, Desired more than constrain'd: to satisfy, If of my freedom 'tis the main part, take No stricter render of me than my all.

Since, Jupiter, our son is good, Take off his miseries.

Peep through thy marble mansion, help, Or we poor ghosts will cry To the shining synod of the rest Against thy deity.

Help, Jupiter, or we appeal, And from thy justice fly.

Jupiter descends in thunder and lightning, sitting  upon an eagle: he throws a thunderbolt.

Whom best I love I cross, to make my gift, The more delay'd, delighted.

Be content, Your low-laid son our godhead will uplift: His comforts thrive, his trials well are spent.

Our Jovial star reign'd at his birth, and in Our temple was he married.

Rise, and fade. He shall be lord of lady Imogen, And happier much by his affliction made.

This tablet lay upon his breast, wherein Our pleasure his full fortune doth confine: and so, away: no further with your din Express impatience, lest you stir up mine.

Thanks, Jupiter! The marble pavement closes, he is enter'd His radiant root.

Away! and, to be blest, Let us with care perform his great behest.

The Apparitions vanish A father to me, and thou hast created A mother and two brothers: but, O scorn! Gone! they went hence so soon as they were born: And so I am awake.

Poor wretches that depend On greatness' favour dream as I have done, Wake and find nothing.

But, alas, I swerve: Many dream not to find, neither deserve, And yet are steep'd in favours: so am I, That have this golden chance and know not why.

'Tis still a dream, or else such stuff as madmen Tongue and brain not, either both or nothing, Or senseless speaking or a speaking such As sense cannot untie.

Be what it is, The action of my life is like it, which I'll keep, if but for sympathy.

Re-enter First Gaoler Come, sir, are you ready for death? Over-roasted rather, ready long ago.

Hanging is the word, sir: if you be ready for that, you are well cooked.

So, if I prove a good repast to the spectators, the dish pays the shot.

I tell thee, fellow, there are none want eyes to direct them the way I am going, but such as wink and will not use them.

What an infinite mock is this, that a man should have the best use of eyes to see the way of blindness! I am sure hanging's the way of winking.

Knock off his manacles, bring your prisoner to the king.

Thou bring'st good news, I am called to be made free.

Thou shalt be then freer than a gaoler, no bolts for the dead.

Unless a man would marry a gallows and beget young gibbets, I never saw one so prone.

Yet, on my conscience, there are verier knaves desire to live, for all he be a Roman: and there be some of them too that die against their wills, so should I, if I were one.

I would we were all of one mind, and one mind good, O, there were desolation of gaolers and gallowses! I speak against my present profit, but my wish hath a preferment in 't.

Stand by my side, you whom the gods have made Preservers of my throne.

I never saw Such noble fury in so poor a thing, Such precious deeds in one that promises nought But beggary and poor looks.

No tidings of him? He hath been search'd among the dead and living, But no trace of him.

To my grief, I am The heir of his reward, To BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS which I will add To you, the liver, heart and brain of Britain, By whom I grant she lives.

Report it. In Cambria are we born, and gentlemen: Further to boast were neither true nor modest, Unless I add, we are honest.

Arise my knights o' the battle: I create you Companions to our person and will fit you With dignities becoming your estates.

Why so sadly Greet you our victory? you look like Romans, And not o' the court of Britain.

Hail, great king! To sour your happiness, I must report The queen is dead.

Who worse than a physician Would this report become? But I consider, By medicine life may be prolong'd, yet death Will seize the doctor too.

How ended she? With horror, madly dying, like her life, Which, being cruel to the world, concluded Most cruel to herself.

What she confess'd I will report, so please you: these her women Can trip me, if I err, who with wet cheeks Were present when she finish'd.

First, she confess'd she never loved you, only Affected greatness got by you, not you: Married your royalty, was wife to your place, Abhorr'd your person.

She alone knew this, And, but she spoke it dying, I would not Believe her lips in opening it.

Proceed. Your daughter, whom she bore in hand to love With such integrity, she did confess Was as a scorpion to her sight, whose life, But that her flight prevented it, she had Ta'en off by poison.

O most delicate fiend! Who is 't can read a woman? Is there more? More, sir, and worse.

Heard you all this, her women? We did, so please your highness.

Consider, sir, the chance of war: the day Was yours by accident, had it gone with us, We should not, when the blood was cool, have threaten'd Our prisoners with the sword.

I have surely seen him: His favour is familiar to me.

Boy, Thou hast look'd thyself into my grace, And art mine own.

I do not bid thee beg my life, good lad, And yet I know thou wilt.

No, no: alack, There's other work in hand: I see a thing Bitter to me as death: your life, good master, Must shuffle for itself.

The boy disdains me, He leaves me, scorns me: briefly die their joys That place them on the truth of girls and boys.

Why stands he so perplex'd? What wouldst thou, boy? I love thee more and more: think more and more What's best to ask.

Know'st him thou look'st on? speak, Wilt have him live? Is he thy kin? thy friend? He is a Roman, no more kin to me Than I to your highness, who, being born your vassal, Am something nearer.

Wherefore eyest him so? I'll tell you, sir, in private, if you please To give me hearing.

Ay, with all my heart, And lend my best attention.

Thou'rt my good youth, my page, I'll be thy master: walk with me, speak freely.

CYMBELINE and IMOGEN converse apart Is not this boy revived from death? One sand another Not more resembles that sweet rosy lad Who died, and was Fidele.

Peace, peace! see further, he eyes us not, forbear, Creatures may be alike: were 't he, I am sure He would have spoke to us.

Since she is living, let the time run on To good or bad.

CYMBELINE and IMOGEN come forward Come, stand thou by our side, Make thy demand aloud.

To IACHIMO Sir, step you forth, Give answer to this boy, and do it freely, Or, by our greatness and the grace of it, Which is our honour, bitter torture shall Winnow the truth from falsehood.

On, speak to him. My boon is, that this gentleman may render Of whom he had this ring.

That diamond upon your finger, say How came it yours? Thou'lt torture me to leave unspoken that Which, to be spoke, would torture thee.

How! me? I am glad to be constrain'd to utter that Which torments me to conceal.

By villany I got this ring: 'twas Leonatus' jewel, Whom thou didst banish, and--which more may grieve thee, As it doth me--a nobler sir ne'er lived 'Twixt sky and ground.

Wilt thou hear more, my lord? All that belongs to this.

That paragon, thy daughter,-- For whom my heart drops blood, and my false spirits Quail to remember--Give me leave, I faint.

My daughter! what of her? Renew thy strength: I had rather thou shouldst live while nature will Than die ere I hear more: strive, man, and speak.

Postures beyond brief nature, for condition, A shop of all the qualities that man Loves woman for, besides that hook of wiving, Fairness which strikes the eye-- I stand on fire: Come to the matter.

All too soon I shall, Unless thou wouldst grieve quickly.

Away to Britain Post I in this design: well may you, sir, Remember me at court, where I was taught Of your chaste daughter the wide difference 'Twixt amorous and villanous.

I am Posthumus, That kill'd thy daughter:--villain-like, I lie-- That caused a lesser villain than myself, A sacrilegious thief, to do't: the temple Of virtue was she, yea, and she herself.

Striking her: she falls O, gentlemen, help! Mine and your mistress! O, my lord Posthumus! You ne'er kill'd Imogen til now.

Help, help! Mine honour'd lady! Does the world go round? How come these staggers on me? Wake, my mistress! If this be so, the gods do mean to strike me To death with mortal joy.

How fares thy mistress? O, get thee from my sight, Thou gavest me poison: dangerous fellow, hence! Breathe not where princes are.

The tune of Imogen! The gods throw stones of sulphur on me, if That box I gave you was not thought by me A precious thing: I had it from the queen.

O gods! I left out one thing which the queen confess'd.

Which must approve thee honest: 'If Pisanio Have,' said she, 'given his mistress that confection Which I gave him for cordial, she is served As I would serve a rat.

Have you ta'en of it? Most like I did, for I was dead.

Why did you throw your wedded lady from you? Think that you are upon a rock, and now Throw me again.

My tears that fall Prove holy water on thee! Imogen, Thy mother's dead.

O, she was nought, and long of her it was That we meet here so strangely: but her son Is gone, we know not how nor where.

Lord Cloten, Upon my lady's missing, came to me With his sword drawn, foam'd at the mouth, and swore, If I discover'd not which way she was gone, It was my instant death.

Marry, the gods forfend! I would not thy good deeds should from my lips Pluck a bard sentence: prithee, valiant youth, Deny't again.

I am sorry for thee: By thine own tongue thou art condemn'd, and must Endure our law: thou'rt dead.

Bind the offender, And take him from our presence.

Stay, sir king: This man is better than the man he slew, As well descended as thyself, and hath More of thee merited than a band of Clotens Had ever scar for.

To the Guard Let his arms alone, They were not born for bondage.

Why, old soldier, Wilt thou undo the worth thou art unpaid for, By tasting of our wrath? How of descent As good as we? In that he spake too far.

We will die all three: But I will prove that two on's are as good As I have given out him.

My sons, I must, For mine own part, unfold a dangerous speech, Though, haply, well for you.

Thou hadst, great king, a subject who Was call'd Belarius.

He it is that hath Assumed this age, indeed a banish'd man, I know not how a traitor.

Take him hence: The whole world shall not save him.

Not too hot: First pay me for the nursing of thy sons, And let it be confiscate all, so soon As I have received it.

Nursing of my sons! I am too blunt and saucy: here's my knee: Ere I arise, I will prefer my sons, Then spare not the old father.

Mighty sir, These two young gentlemen, that call me father And think they are my sons, are none of mine, They are the issue of your loins, my liege, And blood of your begetting.

I, old Morgan, Am that Belarius whom you sometime banish'd: Your pleasure was my mere offence, my punishment Itself, and all my treason, that I suffer'd Was all the harm I did.

These gentle princes-- For such and so they are--these twenty years Have I train'd up: those arts they have as I Could put into them, my breeding was, sir, as Your highness knows.

But, gracious sir, Here are your sons again, and I must lose Two of the sweet'st companions in the world.

The benediction of these covering heavens Fall on their heads like dew! for they are worthy To inlay heaven with stars.

The service that you three have done is more Unlike than this thou tell'st.

I lost my children: If these be they, I know not how to wish A pair of worthier sons.

Guiderius had Upon his neck a mole, a sanguine star, It was a mark of wonder.

This is he, Who hath upon him still that natural stamp: It was wise nature's end in the donation, To be his evidence now.

O, what, am I A mother to the birth of three? Ne'er mother Rejoiced deliverance more.

Blest pray you be, That, after this strange starting from your orbs, may reign in them now! O Imogen, Thou hast lost by this a kingdom.

O my gentle brothers, Have we thus met? O, never say hereafter But I am truest speaker you call'd me brother, When I was but your sister, I you brothers, When ye were so indeed.

And at first meeting loved, Continued so, until we thought he died.

O rare instinct! When shall I hear all through? This fierce Hath to it circumstantial branches, which Distinction should be rich in.

See, Posthumus anchors upon Imogen, And she, like harmless lightning, throws her eye On him, her brother, me, her master, hitting Each object with a joy: the counterchange Is severally in all.

Let's quit this ground, And smoke the temple with our sacrifices.

To BELARIUS Thou art my brother, so we'll hold thee ever.

You are my father too, and did relieve me, To see this gracious season.

All o'erjoy'd, Save these in bonds: let them be joyful too, For they shall taste our comfort.

Happy be you! The forlorn soldier, that so nobly fought, He would have well becomed this place, and graced The thankings of a king.

I am, sir, The soldier that did company these three In poor beseeming, 'twas a fitment for The purpose I then follow'd.

That I was he, Speak, Iachimo: I had you down and might Have made you finish.

But now my heavy conscience sinks my knee, As then your force did.

Take that life, beseech you, Which I so often owe: but your ring first, And here the bracelet of the truest princess That ever swore her faith.

Kneel not to me: The power that I have on you is, to spare you, The malice towards you to forgive you: live, And deal with others better.

Nobly doom'd! We'll learn our freeness of a son-in-law, Pardon's the word to all.

You holp us, sir, As you did mean indeed to be our brother, Joy'd are we that you are.

Thou, Leonatus, art the lion's whelp, The fit and apt construction of thy name, Being Leonatus, doth import so much.

The fingers of the powers above do tune The harmony of this peace.

Laud we the gods, And let our crooked smokes climb to their nostrils From our blest altars.

Set we forward: let A Roman and a British ensign wave Friendly together: so through Lud's-town march: And in the temple of great Jupiter Our peace we'll ratify, seal it with feasts.

Set on there! Never was a war did cease, Ere bloody hands were wash'd, with such a peace.

Enter to him BERNARDO Who's there? Nay, answer me: stand, and unfold yourself.

Long live the king! You come most carefully upon your hour.

'Tis now struck twelve, get thee to bed, Francisco.

For this relief much thanks: 'tis bitter cold, And I am sick at heart.

If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus, The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.

O, farewell, honest soldier: Who hath relieved you? Bernardo has my place.

Holla! Bernardo! What, is Horatio there? A piece of him.

What, has this thing appear'd again to-night? I have seen nothing.

Sit down awhile, And let us once again assail your ears, That are so fortified against our story What we have two nights seen.

Well, sit we down, And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.

What art thou that usurp'st this time of night, Together with that fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark Did sometimes march? by heaven I charge thee, speak! It is offended.

See, it stalks away! Stay! speak, speak! I charge thee, speak! 'Tis gone, and will not answer.

Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour, With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.

In what particular thought to work I know not, But in the gross and scope of my opinion, This bodes some strange eruption to our state.

I think it be no other but e'en so: Well may it sort that this portentous figure Comes armed through our watch, so like the king That was and is the question of these wars.

- But soft, behold! lo, where it comes again! Re-enter Ghost I'll cross it, though it blast me.

Shall I strike at it with my partisan? Do, if it will not stand.

'Tis here! 'Tis here! 'Tis gone! We do it wrong, being so majestical, To offer it the show of violence, For it is, as the air, invulnerable, And our vain blows malicious mockery.

And then it started like a guilty thing Upon a fearful summons.

Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, As needful in our loves, fitting our duty? Let's do't, I pray, and I this morning know Where we shall find him most conveniently.

Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off, And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.

Do not for ever with thy vailed lids Seek for thy noble father in the dust: Thou know'st 'tis common, all that lives must die, Passing through nature to eternity.

If it be, Why seems it so particular with thee? Seems, madam! nay it is, I know not 'seems.

Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet: I pray thee, stay with us, go not to Wittenberg.

Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply: Be as ourself in Denmark.

O, most wicked speed, to post With such dexterity to incestuous sheets! It is not nor it cannot come to good: But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue.

Hail to your lordship! I am glad to see you well: Horatio,--or I do forget myself.

Sir, my good friend, I'll change that name with you: And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio? Marcellus? My good lord-- I am very glad to see you.

Good even, sir. But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg? A truant disposition, good my lord.

I would not hear your enemy say so, Nor shall you do mine ear that violence, To make it truster of your own report Against yourself: I know you are no truant.

But what is your affair in Elsinore? We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

I pray thee, do not mock me, fellow-student, I think it was to see my mother's wedding.

Thrift, thrift, Horatio! the funeral baked meats Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.

Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio! My father!--methinks I see my father.

He was a man, take him for all in all, I shall not look upon his like again.

The king my father! Season your admiration for awhile With an attent ear, till I may deliver, Upon the witness of these gentlemen, This marvel to you.

Two nights together had these gentlemen, Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch, In the dead vast and middle of the night, Been thus encounter'd.

But where was this? My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.

As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true, And we did think it writ down in our duty To let you know of it.

Then saw you not his face? O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.

What, look'd he frowningly? A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

Stay'd it long? While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.

His beard was grizzled--no? It was, as I have seen it in his life, A sable silver'd.

I will watch to-night, Perchance 'twill walk again.

If it assume my noble father's person, I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace.

So, fare you well: Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve, I'll visit you.

My father's spirit in arms! all is not well, I doubt some foul play: would the night were come! Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise, Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.

My necessaries are embark'd: farewell: And, sister, as the winds give benefit And convoy is assistant, do not sleep, But let me hear from you.

No more but so? Think it no more, For nature, crescent, does not grow alone In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes, The inward service of the mind and soul Grows wide withal.

Then if he says he loves you, It fits your wisdom so far to believe it As he in his particular act and place May give his saying deed, which is no further Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.

Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain, If with too credent ear you list his songs, Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open To his unmaster'd importunity.

Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister, And keep you in the rear of your affection, Out of the shot and danger of desire.

Be wary then, best safety lies in fear: Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.

I shall the effect of this good lesson keep, As watchman to my heart.

A double blessing is a double grace, Occasion smiles upon a second leave.

Yet here, Laertes! aboard, aboard, for shame! The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail, And you are stay'd for.

There, my blessing with thee! And these few precepts in thy memory See thou character.

Give thy thoughts no tongue, Nor any unproportioned thought his act.

Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried, Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel, But do not dull thy palm with entertainment Of each new-hatch'd, unfledged comrade.

Beware Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in, Bear't that the opposed may beware of thee.

Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice, Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.

Neither a borrower nor a lender be, For loan oft loses both itself and friend, And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.

This above all: to thine ownself be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man.

Farewell: my blessing season this in thee! Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.

Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well What I have said to you.

'Tis in my memory lock'd, And you yourself shall keep the key of it.

What is't, Ophelia, be hath said to you? So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.

He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders Of his affection to me.

Affection! pooh! you speak like a green girl, Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.

Do you believe his tenders, as you call them? I do not know, my lord, what I should think.

Marry, I'll teach you: think yourself a baby, That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay, Which are not sterling.

Tender yourself more dearly, Or--not to crack the wind of the poor phrase, Running it thus--you'll tender me a fool.

My lord, he hath importuned me with love In honourable fashion.

And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord, With almost all the holy vows of heaven.

From this time Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence, Set your entreatments at a higher rate Than a command to parley.

This is for all: I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, Have you so slander any moment leisure, As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.

Indeed? I heard it not: then it draws near the season Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.

Is it a custom? Ay, marry, is't: But to my mind, though I am native here And to the manner born, it is a custom More honour'd in the breach than the observance.

Look, with what courteous action It waves you to a more removed ground: But do not go with it.

Why, what should be the fear? I do not set my life in a pin's fee, And for my soul, what can it do to that, Being a thing immortal as itself? It waves me forth again: I'll follow it.

My fate cries out, And makes each petty artery in this body As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.

Unhand me, gentlemen. By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me! I say, away! Go on, I'll follow thee.

To what issue will this come? Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.

Where wilt thou lead me? speak, I'll go no further.

My hour is almost come, When I to sulphurous and tormenting flames Must render up myself.

Alas, poor ghost! Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing To what I shall unfold.

I am thy father's spirit, Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night, And for the day confined to fast in fires, Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purged away.

List, list, O, list! If thou didst ever thy dear father love-- O God! Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.

Murder most foul, as in the best it is, But this most foul, strange and unnatural.

Haste me to know't, that I, with wings as swift As meditation or the thoughts of love, May sweep to my revenge.

I find thee apt, And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf, Wouldst thou not stir in this.

But, soft! methinks I scent the morning air, Brief let me be.

But, howsoever thou pursuest this act, Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive Against thy mother aught: leave her to heaven And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge, To prick and sting her.

Fare thee well at once! The glow-worm shows the matin to be near, And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire: Adieu, adieu! Hamlet, remember me.

O all you host of heaven! O earth! what else? And shall I couple hell? O, fie! Hold, hold, my heart, And you, my sinews, grow not instant old, But bear me stiffly up.

Remember thee! Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat In this distracted globe.

How is't, my noble lord? What news, my lord? O, wonderful! Good my lord, tell it.

How say you, then, would heart of man once think it? But you'll be secret? Ay, by heaven, my lord.

There's ne'er a villain dwelling in all Denmark But he's an arrant knave.

There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave To tell us this.

I'm sorry they offend you, heartily, Yes, 'faith heartily.

Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio, And much offence too.

Touching this vision here, It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you: For your desire to know what is between us, O'ermaster 't as you may.

And now, good friends, As you are friends, scholars and soldiers, Give me one poor request.

Ah, ha, boy! say'st thou so? art thou there, Come on--you hear this fellow in the cellarage-- Consent to swear.

Never to speak of this that you have seen, Swear by my sword.

Come hither, gentlemen, And lay your hands again upon my sword: Never to speak of this that you have heard, Swear by my sword.

Well said, old mole! canst work i' the earth so fast? A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.

O day and night, but this is wondrous strange! And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.

There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.

Let us go in together, And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.

The time is out of joint: O cursed spite, That ever I was born to set it right! Nay, come, let's go together.

You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo, Before you visit him, to make inquire Of his behavior.

Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling, Drabbing: you may go so far.

But, my good lord,-- Wherefore should you do this? Ay, my lord, I would know that.

And then, sir, does he this--he does--what was I about to say? By the mass, I was about to say something: where did I leave? At 'closes in the consequence,' at 'friend or so,' and 'gentleman.

Good my lord! Observe his inclination in yourself.

Mad for thy love? My lord, I do not know, But truly, I do fear it.

What said he? He took me by the wrist and held me hard, Then goes he to the length of all his arm, And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow, He falls to such perusal of my face As he would draw it.

This is the very ecstasy of love, Whose violent property fordoes itself And leads the will to desperate undertakings As oft as any passion under heaven That does afflict our natures.

I am sorry. What, have you given him any hard words of late? No, my good lord, but, as you did command, I did repel his fetters and denied His access to me.

Come, go we to the king: This must be known, which, being kept close, might More grief to hide than hate to utter love.

Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern! Moreover that we much did long to see you, The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty sending.

Something have you heard Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it, Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was.

Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you, And sure I am two men there are not living To whom he more adheres.

Both your majesties Might, by the sovereign power you have of us, Put your dread pleasures more into command Than to entreaty.

But we both obey, And here give up ourselves, in the full bent To lay our service freely at your feet, To be commanded.

Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz: And I beseech you instantly to visit My too much changed son.

Go, some of you, And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.

Heavens make our presence and our practises Pleasant and helpful to him! Ay, amen! The ambassadors from Norway, my good lord, Are joyfully return'd.

Give first admittance to the ambassadors, My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.

He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found The head and source of all your son's distemper.

I doubt it is no other but the main, His father's death, and our o'erhasty marriage.

Re-enter POLONIUS, with VOLTIMAND and CORNELIUS Welcome, my good friends! Say, Voltimand, what from our brother Norway? Most fair return of greetings and desires.

It likes us well, And at our more consider'd time well read, Answer, and think upon this business.

Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour: Go to your rest, at night we'll feast together: Most welcome home! This business is well ended.

My liege, and madam, to expostulate What majesty should be, what duty is, Why day is day, night night, and time is time, Were nothing but to waste night, day and time.

That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity, And pity 'tis 'tis true: a foolish figure, But farewell it, for I will use no art.

Perpend. I have a daughter--have while she is mine-- Who, in her duty and obedience, mark, Hath given me this: now gather, and surmise.

'To the celestial and my soul's idol, the most beautified Ophelia,'-- That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase, 'beautified' is a vile phrase: but you shall hear.

Thus: 'In her excellent white bosom, these,  and c.

Came this from Hamlet to her? Good madam, stay awhile, I will be faithful.

'Doubt thou the stars are fire, Doubt that the sun doth move, Doubt truth to be a liar, But never doubt I love.

'O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers, I have not art to reckon my groans: but that I love thee best, O most best, believe it.

Adieu. 'Thine evermore most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him, HAMLET.

This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me, And more above, hath his solicitings, As they fell out by time, by means and place, All given to mine ear.

But how hath she Received his love? What do you think of me? As of a man faithful and honourable.

Hath there been such a time--I'd fain know that-- That I have positively said 'Tis so,' When it proved otherwise? Not that I know.

Take this from this, if this be otherwise: If circumstances lead me, I will find Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed Within the centre.

How may we try it further? You know, sometimes he walks four hours together Here in the lobby.

But, look, where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.

Away, I do beseech you, both away: I'll board him presently.

O, give me leave: How does my good Lord Hamlet? Well, God-a-mercy.

Do you know me, my lord? Excellent well, you are a fishmonger.

Honest, my lord! Ay, sir, to be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man picked out of ten thousand.

For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god kissing carrion,--Have you a daughter? I have, my lord.

Let her not walk i' the sun: conception is a blessing: but not as your daughter may conceive.

daughter: yet he knew me not at first, he said I was a fishmonger: he is far gone, far gone: and truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for love, very near this.

I'll speak to him again. What do you read, my lord? Words, words, words.

What is the matter, my lord? Between who? I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.

Will you walk out of the air, my lord? Into my grave.

How pregnant sometimes his replies are! a happiness that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of.

I will leave him, and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between him and my daughter.

-My honourable lord, I will most humbly take my leave of you.

You cannot, sir, take from me any thing that I will more willingly part withal: except my life, except my life, except my life.

These tedious old fools! You go to seek the Lord Hamlet, there he is.

My honoured lord! My most dear lord! My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both? As the indifferent children of the earth.

Happy, in that we are not over-happy, On fortune's cap we are not the very button.

Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favours? 'Faith, her privates we.

In the secret parts of fortune? O, most true, she is a strumpet.

What's the news? None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.

Let me question more in particular: what have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of fortune, that she sends you to prison hither? Prison, my lord! Denmark's a prison.

A goodly one, in which there are many confines, wards and dungeons, Denmark being one o' the worst.

Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me it is a prison.

Why then, your ambition makes it one, 'tis too narrow for your mind.

O God, I could be bounded in a nut shell and count myself a king of infinite space, were it not that I have bad dreams.

Which dreams indeed are ambition, for the very substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.

Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.

Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows.

Shall we to the court? for, by my fay, I cannot reason.

No such matter: I will not sort you with the rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an honest man, I am most dreadfully attended.

But, in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at Elsinore? To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.

Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks, but I thank you: and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny.

Were you not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come, deal justly with me: come, come, nay, speak.

What should we say, my lord? Why, any thing, but to the purpose.

You were sent for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks which your modesties have not craft enough to colour: I know the good king and queen have sent for you.

I will tell you why, so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather.

What players are they? Even those you were wont to take delight in, the tragedians of the city.

How chances it they travel? their residence, both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.

I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation.

Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the city? are they so followed? No, indeed, are they not.

Is't possible? O, there has been much throwing about of brains.

Do the boys carry it away? Ay, that they do, my lord, Hercules and his load too.

It is not very strange, for mine uncle is king of Denmark, and those that would make mows at him while my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, an hundred ducats a-piece for his picture in little.

'Sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find it out.

Flourish of trumpets within There are the players.

You are welcome: but my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.

In what, my dear lord? I am but mad north-north-west: when the wind is southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw.

Well be with you, gentlemen! Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too: at each ear a hearer: that great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling-clouts.

Happily he's the second time come to them, for they say an old man is twice a child.

I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players, mark it.

You say right, sir: o' Monday morning, 'twas so indeed.

When Roscius was an actor in Rome,-- The actors are come hither, my lord.

For the law of writ and the liberty, these are the only men.

O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou! What a treasure had he, my lord? 'One fair daughter and no more, The which he loved passing well.

Am I not i' the right, old Jephthah? If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter that I love passing well.

Pray God, your voice, like apiece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring.

Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en to't like French falconers, fly at any thing we see: we'll have a speech straight: come, give us a taste of your quality, come, a passionate speech.

'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good discretion.

Prithee, say on: he's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps: say on: come to Hecuba.

'But who, O, who had seen the mobled queen--' 'The mobled queen?' That's good, 'mobled queen' is good.

Look, whether he has not turned his colour and has tears in's eyes.

Pray you, no more. 'Tis well: I'll have thee speak out the rest soon.

My lord, I will use them according to their desert.

God's bodykins, man, much better: use every man after his desert, and who should 'scape whipping? Use them after your own honour and dignity: the less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty.

Dost thou hear me, old friend, can you play the Murder of Gonzago? Ay, my lord.

You could, for a need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines, which I would set down and insert in't, could you not? Ay, my lord.

Follow that lord, and look you mock him My good friends, I'll leave you till night: you are welcome to Elsinore.

Good my lord! Ay, so, God be wi' ye, Now I am alone.

Yet I, A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak, Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause, And can say nothing, no, not for a king, Upon whose property and most dear life A damn'd defeat was made.

I'll have these players Play something like the murder of my father Before mine uncle: I'll observe his looks, I'll tent him to the quick: if he but blench, I know my course.

Nor do we find him forward to be sounded, But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof, When we would bring him on to some confession Of his true state.

Niggard of question, but, of our demands, Most free in his reply.

'Tis most true: And he beseech'd me to entreat your majesties To hear and see the matter.

With all my heart, and it doth much content me To hear him so inclined.

Good gentlemen, give him a further edge, And drive his purpose on to these delights.

And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish That your good beauties be the happy cause Of Hamlet's wildness: so shall I hope your virtues Will bring him to his wonted way again, To both your honours.

Gracious, so please you, We will bestow ourselves.

To OPHELIA Read on this book, That show of such an exercise may colour Your loneliness.

We are oft to blame in this,-- 'Tis too much proved--that with devotion's visage And pious action we do sugar o'er The devil himself.

-Soft you now! The fair Ophelia! Nymph, in thy orisons Be all my sins remember'd.

Good my lord, How does your honour for this many a day? I humbly thank you, well, well, well.

My lord, I have remembrances of yours, That I have longed long to re-deliver, I pray you, now receive them.

Ha, ha! are you honest? My lord? Are you fair? What means your lordship? That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no discourse to your beauty.

I did love you once. Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.

You should not have believed me, for virtue cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it: I loved you not.

What should such fellows as I do crawling between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves, all, believe none of us.

Go thy ways to a nunnery. Where's your father? At home, my lord.

Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool no where but in's own house.

Farewell. O, help him, you sweet heavens! If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny.

Or, if thou wilt needs marry, marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what monsters you make of them.

I say, we will have no more marriages: those that are married already, all but one, shall live, the rest shall keep as they are.

What think you on't? It shall do well: but yet do I believe The origin and commencement of his grief Sprung from neglected love.

How now, Ophelia! You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said, We heard it all.

If she find him not, To England send him, or confine him where Your wisdom best shall think.

It shall be so: Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.

Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it, as many of your players do, I had as lief the town-crier spoke my lines.

Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh a whole theatre of others.

I hope we have reformed that indifferently with us, O, reform it altogether.

Go, make you ready. How now, my lord! I will the king hear this piece of work? And the queen too, and that presently.

Will you two help to hasten them? We will, my lord.

What ho! Horatio! Here, sweet lord, at your service.

Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man As e'er my conversation coped withal.

Give me that man That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart, As I do thee.

Give him heedful note, For I mine eyes will rivet to his face, And after we will both our judgments join In censure of his seeming.

Well, my lord: If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing, And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.

They are coming to the play, I must be idle: Get you a place.

I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet, these words are not mine.

To POLONIUS My lord, you played once i' the university, you say? That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.

What did you enact? I did enact Julius Caesar: I was killed i' the Capitol, Brutus killed me.

It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there.

Be the players ready? Ay, my lord, they stay upon your patience.

Lady, shall I lie in your lap? Lying down at OPHELIA's feet No, my lord.

Do you think I meant country matters? I think nothing, my lord.

What should a man do but be merry? for, look you, how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died within these two hours.

So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for I'll have a suit of sables.

The dumb-show enters What means this, my lord? Marry, this is miching mallecho, it means mischief.

Belike this show imports the argument of the play.

We shall know by this fellow: the players cannot keep counsel, they'll tell all.

Will he tell us what this show meant? Ay, or any show that you'll show him: be not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.

You are naught, you are naught: I'll mark the play.

For us, and for our tragedy, Here stooping to your clemency, We beg your hearing patiently.

Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring? 'Tis brief, my lord.

So many journeys may the sun and moon Make us again count o'er ere love be done! But, woe is me, you are so sick of late, So far from cheer and from your former state, That I distrust you.

Yet, though I distrust, Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must: For women's fear and love holds quantity, In neither aught, or in extremity.

Now, what my love is, proof hath made you know, And as my love is sized, my fear is so: Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear, Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.

The instances that second marriage move Are base respects of thrift, but none of love: A second time I kill my husband dead, When second husband kisses me in bed.

I do believe you think what now you speak, But what we do determine oft we break.

Purpose is but the slave to memory, Of violent birth, but poor validity, Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree, But fall, unshaken, when they mellow be.

Most necessary 'tis that we forget To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt: What to ourselves in passion we propose, The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.

The violence of either grief or joy Their own enactures with themselves destroy: Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament, Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.

This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange That even our loves should with our fortunes change, For 'tis a question left us yet to prove, Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.

The great man down, you mark his favourite flies, The poor advanced makes friends of enemies.

And hitherto doth love on fortune tend, For who not needs shall never lack a friend, And who in want a hollow friend doth try, Directly seasons him his enemy.

Sweet, leave me here awhile, My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile The tedious day with sleep.

Sleep rock thy brain, And never come mischance between us twain! Madam, how like you this play? The lady protests too much, methinks.

Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in 't? No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest, no offence i' the world.

I could interpret between you and your love, if I could see the puppets dallying.

Begin, murderer, pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin.

Come: 'the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge.

Pours the poison into the sleeper's ears He poisons him i' the garden for's estate.

His name's Gonzago: the story is extant, and writ in choice Italian: you shall see anon how the murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife.

What, frighted with false fire! How fares my lord? Give o'er the play.

Give me some light: away! Lights, lights, lights! Why, let the stricken deer go weep, The hart ungalled play, For some must watch, while some must sleep: So runs the world away.

Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers-- if the rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me--with two Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir? Half a share.

For thou dost know, O Damon dear, This realm dismantled was Of Jove himself, and now reigns here A very, very--pajock.

O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a thousand pound.

Upon the talk of the poisoning? I did very well note him.

Ah, ha! Come, some music! come, the recorders! For if the king like not the comedy, Why then, belike, he likes it not, perdy.

Come, some music! Re-enter ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.

The king, sir,-- Ay, sir, what of him? Is in his retirement marvellous distempered.

Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to his doctor, for, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.

Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame and start not so wildly from my affair.

The queen, your mother, in most great affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.

Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed.

If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, I will do your mother's commandment: if not, your pardon and my return shall be the end of my business.

O wonderful son, that can so astonish a mother! But is there no sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration? Impart.

She desires to speak with you in her closet, ere you go to bed.

Have you any further trade with us? My lord, you once did love me.

Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? you do, surely, bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to your friend.

How can that be, when you have the voice of the king himself for your succession in Denmark? Ay, but sir, 'While the grass grows,'--the proverb is something musty.

Re-enter Players with recorders O, the recorders! let me see one.

To withdraw with you:--why do you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me into a toil? O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too I do not well understand that.

'Tis as easy as lying: govern these ventages with your lingers and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music.

But these cannot I command to any utterance of harmony, I have not the skill.

'Sblood, do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me, yet you cannot play upon me.

God bless you, sir! My lord, the queen would speak with you, and Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel? By the mass, and 'tis like a camel, indeed.

We will ourselves provide: Most holy and religious fear it is To keep those many many bodies safe That live and feed upon your majesty.

The single and peculiar life is bound, With all the strength and armour of the mind, To keep itself from noyance, but much more That spirit upon whose weal depend and rest The lives of many.

Never alone Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.

Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage, For we will fetters put upon this fear, Which now goes too free-footed.

Fare you well, my liege: I'll call upon you ere you go to bed, And tell you what I know.

O, my offence is rank it smells to heaven, It hath the primal eldest curse upon't, A brother's murder.

Retires and kneels Now might I do it pat, now he is praying, And now I'll do't.

That would be scann'd: A villain kills my father, and for that, I, his sole son, do this same villain send To heaven.

My mother stays: This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.

Look you lay home to him: Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with, And that your grace hath screen'd and stood between Much heat and him.

I'll sconce me even here. Pray you, be round with him.

I'll warrant you, Fear me not: withdraw, I hear him coming.

POLONIUS hides behind the arras Now, mother, what's the matter? Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

Why, how now, Hamlet! What's the matter now? Have you forgot me? No, by the rood, not so: You are the queen, your husband's brother's wife, And--would it were not so!--you are my mother.

Come, come, and sit you down, you shall not budge, You go not till I set you up a glass Where you may see the inmost part of you.

Lifts up the array and discovers POLONIUS Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell! I took thee for thy better: take thy fortune, Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.

Ay me, what act, That roars so loud, and thunders in the index? Look here, upon this picture, and on this, The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.

Look you now, what follows: Here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear, Blasting his wholesome brother.

O Hamlet, speak no more: Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul, And there I see such black and grained spots As will not leave their tinct.

But, look, amazement on thy mother sits: O, step between her and her fighting soul: Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works: Speak to her, Hamlet.

O gentle son, Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper Sprinkle cool patience.

Whereon do you look? On him, on him! Look you, how pale he glares! His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones, Would make them capable.

Do not look upon me, Lest with this piteous action you convert My stern effects: then what I have to do Will want true colour, tears perchance for blood.

To whom do you speak this? Do you see nothing there? Nothing at all, yet all that is I see.

Nor did you nothing hear? No, nothing but ourselves.

Confess yourself to heaven, Repent what's past, avoid what is to come, And do not spread the compost on the weeds, To make them ranker.

Forgive me this my virtue, For in the fatness of these pursy times Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg, Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.

O, throw away the worser part of it, And live the purer with the other half.

Good night: but go not to mine uncle's bed, Assume a virtue, if you have it not.

That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat, Of habits devil, is angel yet in this, That to the use of actions fair and good He likewise gives a frock or livery, That aptly is put on.

Once more, good night: And when you are desirous to be bless'd, I'll blessing beg of you.

For this same lord, Pointing to POLONIUS I do repent: but heaven hath pleased it so, To punish me with this and this with me, That I must be their scourge and minister.

I will bestow him, and will answer well The death I gave him.

So, again, good night. I must be cruel, only to be kind: Thus bad begins and worse remains behind.

Let the birds fly, and, like the famous ape, To try conclusions, in the basket creep, And break your own neck down.

Be thou assured, if words be made of breath, And breath of life, I have no life to breathe What thou hast said to me.

I must to England, you know that? I had forgot: 'tis so concluded on.

There's letters seal'd: and my two schoolfellows, Whom I will trust as I will adders fang'd, They bear the mandate, they must sweep my way, And marshal me to knavery.

This man shall set me packing: I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.

Indeed this counsellor Is now most still, most secret and most grave, Who was in life a foolish prating knave.

There's matter in these sighs, these profound heaves: You must translate: 'tis fit we understand them.

Where is your son? Bestow this place on us a little while.

O heavy deed! It had been so with us, had we been there: His liberty is full of threats to all, To you yourself, to us, to every one.

Where is he gone? To draw apart the body he hath kill'd: O'er whom his very madness, like some ore Among a mineral of metals base, Shows itself pure, he weeps for what is done.

O Gertrude, come away! The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch, But we will ship him hence: and this vile deed We must, with all our majesty and skill, Both countenance and excuse.

I pray you, haste in this. Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends, And let them know, both what we mean to do, And what's untimely done.

O, come away! My soul is full of discord and dismay.

What noise? who calls on Hamlet? O, here they come.

What have you done, my lord, with the dead body? Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.

Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence And bear it to the chapel.

Believe what? That I can keep your counsel and not mine own.

I am glad of it: a knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.

My lord, you must tell us where the body is, and go with us to the king.

The body is with the king, but the king is not with the body.

The king is a thing-- A thing, my lord! Of nothing: bring me to him.

Hide fox, and all after. I have sent to seek him, and to find the body.

To bear all smooth and even, This sudden sending him away must seem Deliberate pause: diseases desperate grown By desperate appliance are relieved, Or not at all.

How now! what hath befall'n? Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord, We cannot get from him.

But where is he? Without, my lord, guarded, to know your pleasure.

At supper! where? Not where he eats, but where he is eaten: a certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at him.

Alas, alas! A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and cat of the fish that hath fed of that worm.

What dost you mean by this? Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through the guts of a beggar.

Where is Polonius? In heaven, send hither to see: if your messenger find him not there, seek him i' the other place yourself.

But indeed, if you find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up the stairs into the lobby.

My mother: father and mother is man and wife, man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother.

Do it, England, For like the hectic in my blood he rages, And thou must cure me: till I know 'tis done, Howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begun.

Go, captain, from me greet the Danish king, Tell him that, by his licence, Fortinbras Craves the conveyance of a promised march Over his kingdom.

You know the rendezvous. If that his majesty would aught with us, We shall express our duty in his eye, And let him know so.

Good sir, whose powers are these? They are of Norway, sir.

How purposed, sir, I pray you? Against some part of Poland.

Who commands them, sir? The nephews to old Norway, Fortinbras.

Goes it against the main of Poland, sir, Or for some frontier? Truly to speak, and with no addition, We go to gain a little patch of ground That hath in it no profit but the name.

To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it, Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.

Wilt please you go, my lord? I'll be with you straight go a little before.

How all occasions do inform against me, And spur my dull revenge! What is a man, If his chief good and market of his time Be but to sleep and feed? a beast, no more.

Sure, he that made us with such large discourse, Looking before and after, gave us not That capability and god-like reason To fust in us unused.

Rightly to be great Is not to stir without great argument, But greatly to find quarrel in a straw When honour's at the stake.

She is importunate, indeed distract: Her mood will needs be pitied.

'Twere good she were spoken with, for she may strew Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.

To my sick soul, as sin's true nature is, Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss: So full of artless jealousy is guilt, It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.

Re-enter HORATIO, with OPHELIA Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark? How now, Ophelia! How should I your true love know From another one? By his cockle hat and staff, And his sandal shoon.

Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song? Say you? nay, pray you, mark.

He is dead and gone, lady, He is dead and gone, At his head a grass-green turf, At his heels a stone.

White his shroud as the mountain snow,-- Alas, look here, my lord.

Larded with sweet flowers Which bewept to the grave did go With true-love showers.

How do you, pretty lady? Well, God 'ild you! They say the owl was a baker's daughter.

Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be.

Then up he rose, and donn'd his clothes, And dupp'd the chamber-door, Let in the maid, that out a maid Never departed more.

Pretty Ophelia! Indeed, la, without an oath, I'll make an end on't: By Gis and by Saint Charity, Alack, and fie for shame! Young men will do't, if they come to't, By cock, they are to blame.

Quoth she, before you tumbled me, You promised me to wed.

So would I ha' done, by yonder sun, An thou hadst not come to my bed.

How long hath she been thus? I hope all will be well.

We must be patient: but I cannot choose but weep, to think they should lay him i' the cold ground.

My brother shall know of it: and so I thank you for your good counsel.

Come, my coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet ladies, good night, good night.

Follow her close, give her good watch, I pray you.

O, this is the poison of deep grief, it springs All from her father's death.

O Gertrude, Gertrude, When sorrows come, they come not single spies But in battalions.

O my dear Gertrude, this, Like to a murdering-piece, in many places Gives me superfluous death.

A noise within Alack, what noise is this? Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.

What is the matter? Save yourself, my lord: The ocean, overpeering of his list, Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste Than young Laertes, in a riotous head, O'erbears your officers.

Noise within Where is this king? Sirs, stand you all without.

They retire without the door I thank you: keep the door.

O thou vile king, Give me my father! Calmly, good Laertes.

That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard, Cries cuckold to my father, brands the harlot Even here, between the chaste unsmirched brow Of my true mother.

How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with: To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil! Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit! I dare damnation.

To this point I stand, That both the worlds I give to negligence, Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged Most thoroughly for my father.

Who shall stay you? My will, not all the world: And for my means, I'll husband them so well, They shall go far with little.

Good Laertes, If you desire to know the certainty Of your dear father's death, is't writ in your revenge, That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and foe, Winner and loser? None but his enemies.

Will you know them then? To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms, And like the kind life-rendering pelican, Repast them with my blood.

Why, now you speak Like a good child and a true gentleman.

That I am guiltless of your father's death, And am most sensible in grief for it, It shall as level to your judgment pierce As day does to your eye.

You must sing a-down a-down, An you call him a-down-a.

O, how the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward, that stole his master's daughter.

There's rosemary, that's for remembrance, pray, love, remember: and there is pansies.

that's for thoughts. A document in madness, thoughts and remembrance fitted.

There's fennel for you, and columbines: there's rue for you, and here's some for me: we may call it herb-grace o' Sundays: O you must wear your rue with a difference.

There's a daisy: I would give you some violets, but they withered all when my father died: they say he made a good end,-- For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.

Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself, She turns to favour and to prettiness.

And will he not come again? And will he not come again? No, no, he is dead: Go to thy death-bed: He never will come again.

His beard was as white as snow, All flaxen was his poll: He is gone, he is gone, And we cast away moan: God ha' mercy on his soul! And of all Christian souls, I pray God.

God be wi' ye. Do you see this, O God? Laertes, I must commune with your grief, Or you deny me right.

Go but apart, Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will.

So you shall, And where the offence is let the great axe fall.

What are they that would speak with me? Sailors, sir: they say they have letters for you.

I do not know from what part of the world I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.

There's a letter for you, sir, it comes from the ambassador that was bound for England, if your name be Horatio, as I am let to know it is.

this, give these fellows some means to the king: they have letters for him.

Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us chase.

Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the grapple I boarded them: on the instant they got clear of our ship, so I alone became their prisoner.

They have dealt with me like thieves of mercy: but they knew what they did, I am to do a good turn for them.

Let the king have the letters I have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death.

I have words to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb, yet are they much too light for the bore of the matter.

Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course for England: of them I have much to tell thee.

Come, I will make you way for these your letters, And do't the speedier, that you may direct me To him from whom you brought them.

Now must your conscience my acquaintance seal, And you must put me in your heart for friend, Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear, That he which hath your noble father slain Pursued my life.

It well appears: but tell me Why you proceeded not against these feats, So crimeful and so capital in nature, As by your safety, wisdom, all things else, You mainly were stirr'd up.

O, for two special reasons, Which may to you, perhaps, seem much unsinew'd, But yet to me they are strong.

Break not your sleeps for that: you must not think That we are made of stuff so flat and dull That we can let our beard be shook with danger And think it pastime.

From Hamlet! who brought them? Sailors, my lord, they say, I saw them not: They were given me by Claudio, he received them Of him that brought them.

Leave us. 'High and mighty, You shall know I am set naked on your kingdom.

To-morrow shall I beg leave to see your kingly eyes: when I shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden and more strange return.

'HAMLET.' What should this mean? Are all the rest come back? Or is it some abuse, and no such thing? Know you the hand? 'Tis Hamlets character.

But let him come, It warms the very sickness in my heart, That I shall live and tell him to his teeth, 'Thus didest thou.

If it be so, Laertes-- As how should it be so? how otherwise?-- Will you be ruled by me? Ay, my lord, So you will not o'errule me to a peace.

My lord, I will be ruled, The rather, if you could devise it so That I might be the organ.

I know him well: he is the brooch indeed And gem of all the nation.

Sir, this report of his Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy That he could nothing do but wish and beg Your sudden coming o'er, to play with him.

But, to the quick o' the ulcer:-- Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake, To show yourself your father's son in deed More than in words? To cut his throat i' the church.

No place, indeed, should murder sanctuarize, Revenge should have no bounds.

But, good Laertes, Will you do this, keep close within your chamber.

I will do't: And, for that purpose, I'll anoint my sword.

Soft! let me see: We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings: I ha't.

How now, sweet queen! One woe doth tread upon another's heel, So fast they follow, your sister's drown'd, Laertes.

Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia, And therefore I forbid my tears: but yet It is our trick, nature her custom holds, Let shame say what it will: when these are gone, The woman will be out.

Adieu, my lord: I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze, But that this folly douts it.

Let's follow, Gertrude: How much I had to do to calm his rage! Now fear I this will give it start again, Therefore let's follow.

Is she to be buried in Christian burial that wilfully seeks her own salvation? I tell thee she is: and therefore make her grave straight: the crowner hath sat on her, and finds it Christian burial.

How can that be, unless she drowned herself in her own defence? Why, 'tis found so.

For here lies the point:  if I drown myself wittingly, it argues an act: and an act hath three branches: it is, to act, to do, to perform: argal, she drowned herself wittingly.

Nay, but hear you, goodman delver,-- Give me leave.

But is this law? Ay, marry, is't, crowner's quest law.

Will you ha' the truth on't? If this had not been a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o' Christian burial.

Why, there thou say'st: and the more pity that great folk should have countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves, more than their even Christian.

Come, my spade. There is no ancient gentleman but gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers: they hold up Adam's profession.

Was he a gentleman? He was the first that ever bore arms.

What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter? The gallows-maker, for that frame outlives a thousand tenants.

To't again, come. 'Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a carpenter?' Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.

Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will not mend his pace with beating, and, when you are asked this question next, say 'a grave-maker: 'the houses that he makes last till doomsday.

Go, get thee to Yaughan: fetch me a stoup of liquor.

He digs and sings In youth, when I did love, did love, Methought it was very sweet, To contract, O, the time, for, ah, my behove, O, methought, there was nothing meet.

Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at grave-making? Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.

'Tis e'en so: the hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.

But age, with his stealing steps, Hath claw'd me in his clutch, And hath shipped me intil the land, As if I had never been such.

Why, e'en so: and now my Lady Worm's, chapless, and knocked about the mazzard with a sexton's spade: here's fine revolution, an we had the trick to see't.

Did these bones cost no more the breeding, but to play at loggats with 'em? mine ache to think on't.

A pick-axe, and a spade, a spade, For and a shrouding sheet: O, a pit of clay for to be made For such a guest is meet.

Is not parchment made of sheepskins? Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too.

They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that.

I will speak to this fellow. Whose grave's this, sirrah? Mine, sir.

O, a pit of clay for to be made For such a guest is meet.

You lie out on't, sir, and therefore it is not yours: for my part, I do not lie in't, and yet it is mine.

'Thou dost lie in't, to be in't and say it is thine: 'tis for the dead, not for the quick, therefore thou liest.

'Tis a quick lie, sir, 'twill away gain, from me to What man dost thou dig it for? For no man, sir.

Who is to be buried in't? One that was a woman, sir, but, rest her soul, she's dead.

How absolute the knave is! we must speak by the card, or equivocation will undo us.

By the Lord, Horatio, these three years I have taken a note of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he gaffs his kibe.

How long hast thou been a Of all the days i' the year, I came to't that day that our last king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.

How long is that since? Cannot you tell that? every fool can tell that: it was the very day that young Hamlet was born, he that is mad, and sent into England.

Ay, marry, why was he sent into England? Why, because he was mad: he shall recover his wits there, or, if he do not, it's no great matter there.

'Twill, a not be seen in him there, there the men are as mad as he.

Upon what ground? Why, here in Denmark: I have been sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.

Why he more than another? Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his trade, that he will keep out water a great while, and your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body.

Here's a skull now, this skull has lain in the earth three and twenty years.

Whose was it? A whoreson mad fellow's it was: whose do you think it was? Nay, I know not.

A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! a' poured a flagon of Rhenish on my head once.

This same skull, sir, was Yorick's skull, the king's jester.

Here hung those lips that I have kissed I know not how oft.

What's that, my lord? Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this fashion i' the earth? E'en so.

And smelt so? pah! Puts down the skull E'en so, my lord.

To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander, till he find it stopping a bung-hole? 'Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.

The queen, the courtiers: who is this they follow? And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken The corse they follow did with desperate hand Fordo its own life: 'twas of some estate.

Retiring with HORATIO What ceremony else? That is Laertes, A very noble youth: mark.

Must there no more be done? No more be done: We should profane the service of the dead To sing a requiem and such rest to her As to peace-parted souls.

Lay her i' the earth: And from her fair and unpolluted flesh May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest, A ministering angel shall my sister be, When thou liest howling.

Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I, Hamlet the Dane.

Leaps into the grave The devil take thy soul! Grappling with him Thou pray'st not well.

I prithee, take thy fingers from my throat, For, though I am not splenitive and rash, Yet have I something in me dangerous, Which let thy wiseness fear: hold off thy hand.

The Attendants part them, and they come out of the grave Why I will fight with him upon this theme Until my eyelids will no longer wag.

O my son, what theme? I loved Ophelia: forty thousand brothers Could not, with all their quantity of love, Make up my sum.

'Swounds, show me what thou'lt do: Woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear thyself? Woo't drink up eisel? eat a crocodile? I'll do't.

This is mere madness: And thus awhile the fit will work on him, Anon, as patient as the female dove, When that her golden couplets are disclosed, His silence will sit drooping.

Hear you, sir, What is the reason that you use me thus? I loved you ever: but it is no matter, Let Hercules himself do what he may, The cat will mew and dog will have his day.

To LAERTES Strengthen your patience in our last night's speech, We'll put the matter to the present push.

This grave shall have a living monument: An hour of quiet shortly shall we see, Till then, in patience our proceeding be.

Up from my cabin, My sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark Groped I to find out them, had my desire.

Is't possible? Here's the commission: read it at more leisure.

But wilt thou hear me how I did proceed? I beseech you.

How was this seal'd? Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.

Now, the next day Was our sea-fight, and what to this was sequent Thou know'st already.

It will be short: the interim is mine, And a man's life's no more than to say 'One.

But I am very sorry, good Horatio, That to Laertes I forgot myself, For, by the image of my cause, I see The portraiture of his: I'll court his favours.

But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me Into a towering passion.

Peace! who comes here? Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.

Thy state is the more gracious, for 'tis a vice to know him.

He hath much land, and fertile: let a beast be lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king's mess: 'tis a chough, but, as I say, spacious in the possession of dirt.

Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I should impart a thing to you from his majesty.

I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit.

Put your bonnet to his right use, 'tis for the head. I thank your lordship, it is very hot.

No, believe me, 'tis very cold, the wind is It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.

But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my Exceedingly, my lord, it is very sultry,--as 'twere,--I cannot tell how.

Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you, though, I know, to divide him inventorially would dizzy the arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail.

The concernancy, sir? why do we wrap the gentleman in our more rawer breath? Is't not possible to understand in another tongue? You will do't, sir, really.

What imports the nomination of this gentleman? Of Laertes? His purse is empty already, all's golden words are spent.

I know you are not ignorant-- I would you did, sir, yet, in faith, if you did, it would not much approve me.

Well, sir? You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is-- I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with him in excellence, but, to know a man well, were to know himself.

I mean, sir, for his weapon, but in the imputation laid on him by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.

What call you the carriages? I knew you must be edified by the margent ere you had done.

The phrase would be more german to the matter, if we could carry cannon by our sides: I would it might be hangers till then.

But, on: six Barbary horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages, that's the French bet against the Danish.

How if I answer 'no'? I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.

Shall I re-deliver you e'en so? To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.

He does well to commend it himself, there are no tongues else for's turn.

This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.

I am constant to my purpose, they follow the king's pleasure: if his fitness speaks, mine is ready, now or whensoever, provided I be so able as now.

The queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.

I do not think so: since he went into France, I have been in continual practise: I shall win at the odds.

But thou wouldst not think how ill all's here about my heart: but it is no matter.

Nay, good my lord,-- It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of gain-giving, as would perhaps trouble a woman.

If your mind dislike any thing, obey it: I will forestall their repair hither, and say you are not Not a whit, we defy augury: there's a special providence in the fall of a sparrow.

KING CLAUDIUS puts LAERTES' hand into HAMLET's Give me your pardon, sir: I've done you wrong, But pardon't, as you are a gentleman.

This presence knows, And you must needs have heard, how I am punish'd With sore distraction.

What I have done, That might your nature, honour and exception Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.

Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Never Hamlet: If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away, And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes, Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.

Who does it, then? His madness: if't be so, Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd, His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.

Sir, in this audience, Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil Free me so far in your most generous thoughts, That I have shot mine arrow o'er the house, And hurt my brother.

But till that time, I do receive your offer'd love like love, And will not wrong it.

I embrace it freely, And will this brother's wager frankly play.

I'll be your foil, Laertes: in mine ignorance Your skill shall, like a star i' the darkest night, Stick fiery off indeed.

Cousin Hamlet, You know the wager? Very well, my lord Your grace hath laid the odds o' the weaker side.

I do not fear it, I have seen you both: But since he is better'd, we have therefore odds.

These foils have all a length? They prepare to play Ay, my good lord.

Give me the cups, And let the kettle to the trumpet speak, The trumpet to the cannoneer without, The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, 'Now the king dunks to Hamlet.

Come, begin: And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.

Hamlet, this pearl is thine, Here's to thy health.

Trumpets sound, and cannon shot off within Give him the cup.

Come. They play Another hit, what say you? A touch, a touch, I do confess.

Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows, The queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.

Come, for the third, Laertes: you but dally, I pray you, pass with your best violence, I am afeard you make a wanton of me.

Have at you now! LAERTES wounds HAMLET, then in scuffling, they change rapiers, and HAMLET wounds LAERTES Part them, they are incensed.

QUEEN GERTRUDE falls Look to the queen there, ho! They bleed on both sides.

How is it, my lord? How is't, Laertes? Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric, I am justly kill'd with mine own treachery.

How does the queen? She swounds to see them bleed.

No, no, the drink, the drink,--O my dear Hamlet,-- The drink, the drink! I am poison'd.

O villany! Ho! let the door be lock'd: Treachery! Seek it out.

The point!--envenom'd too! Then, venom, to thy work.

Stabs KING CLAUDIUS Treason! treason! O, yet defend me, friends, I am but hurt.

Here, thou incestuous, murderous, damned Dane, Drink off this potion.

KING CLAUDIUS dies He is justly served, It is a poison temper'd by himself.

Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet: Mine and my father's death come not upon thee, Nor thine on me.

Horatio, I am dead, Thou livest, report me and my cause aright To the unsatisfied.

Never believe it: I am more an antique Roman than a Dane: Here's yet some liquor left.

As thou'rt a man, Give me the cup: let go, by heaven, I'll have't.

March afar off, and shot within What warlike noise is this? Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland, To the ambassadors of England gives This warlike volley.

Let us haste to hear it, And call the noblest to the audience.

For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune: I have some rights of memory in this kingdom, Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.

Take up the bodies: such a sight as this Becomes the field, but here shows much amiss.

But how, my lord, shall we resist it now? It must be thought on.

A hundred almshouses right well supplied, And to the coffers of the king beside, A thousand pounds by the year: thus runs the bill.

But what prevention? The king is full of grace and fair regard.

It must be so, for miracles are ceased, And therefore we must needs admit the means How things are perfected.

What was the impediment that broke this off? The French ambassador upon that instant Craved audience, and the hour, I think, is come To give him hearing: is it four o'clock? It is.

Then go we in, to know his embassy, Which I could with a ready guess declare, Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.

Where is my gracious Lord of Canterbury? Not here in presence.

Shall we call in the ambassador, my liege? Not yet, my cousin: we would be resolved, Before we hear him, of some things of weight That task our thoughts, concerning us and France.

God and his angels guard your sacred throne And make you long become it! Sure, we thank you.

Under this conjuration, speak, my lord, For we will hear, note and believe in heart That what you speak is in your conscience wash'd As pure as sin with baptism.

Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers, That owe yourselves, your lives and services To this imperial throne.

Besides, their writers say, King Pepin, which deposed Childeric, Did, as heir general, being descended Of Blithild, which was daughter to King Clothair, Make claim and title to the crown of France.

May I with right and conscience make this claim? The sin upon my head, dread sovereign! For in the book of Numbers is it writ, When the man dies, let the inheritance Descend unto the daughter.

Your brother kings and monarchs of the earth Do all expect that you should rouse yourself, As did the former lions of your blood.

We must not only arm to invade the French, But lay down our proportions to defend Against the Scot, who will make road upon us With all advantages.

They of those marches, gracious sovereign, Shall be a wall sufficient to defend Our inland from the pilfering borderers.

It follows then the cat must stay at home: Yet that is but a crush'd necessity, Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries, And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.

End in one purpose, and be all well borne Without defeat.

Therefore to France, my liege. Divide your happy England into four, Whereof take you one quarter into France, And you withal shall make all Gallia shake.

If we, with thrice such powers left at home, Cannot defend our own doors from the dog, Let us be worried and our nation lose The name of hardiness and policy.

Now are we well prepared to know the pleasure Of our fair cousin Dauphin, for we hear Your greeting is from him, not from the king.

Your highness, lately sending into France, Did claim some certain dukedoms, in the right Of your great predecessor, King Edward the Third.

He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit, This tun of treasure, and, in lieu of this, Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim Hear no more of you.

This the Dauphin speaks. What treasure, uncle? Tennis-balls, my liege.

Tell him he hath made a match with such a wrangler That all the courts of France will be disturb'd With chaces.

And we understand him well, How he comes o'er us with our wilder days, Not measuring what use we made of them.

We never valued this poor seat of England, And therefore, living hence, did give ourself To barbarous licence, as 'tis ever common That men are merriest when they are from home.

But this lies all within the will of God, To whom I do appeal, and in whose name Tell you the Dauphin I am coming on, To venge me as I may and to put forth My rightful hand in a well-hallow'd cause.

So get you hence in peace, and tell the Dauphin His jest will savour but of shallow wit, When thousands weep more than did laugh at it.

Therefore, my lords, omit no happy hour That may give furtherance to our expedition, For we have now no thought in us but France, Save those to God, that run before our business.

Therefore let every man now task his thought, That this fair action may on foot be brought.

For now sits Expectation in the air, And hides a sword from hilts unto the point With crowns imperial, crowns and coronets, Promised to Harry and his followers.

The French, advised by good intelligence Of this most dreadful preparation, Shake in their fear and with pale policy Seek to divert the English purposes.

But, till the king come forth, and not till then, Unto Southampton do we shift our scene.

What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends yet? For my part, I care not: I say little, but when time shall serve, there shall be smiles, but that shall be as it may.

I dare not fight, but I will wink and hold out mine iron: it is a simple one, but what though? it will toast cheese, and it will endure cold as another man's sword will: and there's an end.

I will bestow a breakfast to make you friends, and we'll be all three sworn brothers to France: let it be so, good Corporal Nym.

Faith, I will live so long as I may, that's the certain of it, and when I cannot live any longer, I will do as I may: that is my rest, that is the rendezvous of it.

It is certain, corporal, that he is married to Nell Quickly: and certainly she did you wrong, for you were troth-plight to her.

I cannot tell: things must be as they may: men may sleep, and they may have their throats about them at that time, and some say knives have edges.

It must be as it may: though patience be a tired mare, yet she will plod.

Here comes Ancient Pistol and his wife: good corporal, be patient here.

How now, mine host Pistol! Base tike, call'st thou me host? Now, by this hand, I swear, I scorn the term, Nor shall my Nell keep lodgers.

No, by my troth, not long, for we cannot lodge and board a dozen or fourteen gentlewomen that live honestly by the prick of their needles, but it will be thought we keep a bawdy house straight.

NYM and PISTOL draw O well a day, Lady, if he be not drawn now! we shall see wilful adultery and murder committed.

Good lieutenant! good corporal! offer nothing here.

Pish for thee, Iceland dog! thou prick-ear'd cur of Iceland! Good Corporal Nym, show thy valour, and put up your sword.

O braggart vile and damned furious wight! The grave doth gape, and doting death is near, Therefore exhale.

Hear me, hear me what I say: he that strikes the first stroke, I'll run him up to the hilts, as I am a soldier.

Give me thy fist, thy fore-foot to me give: Thy spirits are most tall.

I will cut thy throat, one time or other, in fair terms: that is the humour of it.

Go to. Mine host Pistol, you must come to my master, and you, hostess: he is very sick, and would to bed.

Good Bardolph, put thy face between his sheets, and do the office of a warming-pan.

Faith, he's very ill. Away, you rogue! By my troth, he'll yield the crow a pudding one of these days.

The king has killed his heart. Good husband, come home presently.

They draw By this sword, he that makes the first thrust, I'll kill him, by this sword, I will.

Sword is an oath, and oaths must have their course.

Corporal Nym, an thou wilt be friends, be friends: an thou wilt not, why, then, be enemies with me too.

Re-enter Hostess As ever you came of women, come in quickly to Sir John.

Ah, poor heart! he is so shaked of a burning quotidian tertian, that it is most lamentable to behold.

Sweet men, come to him. The king hath run bad humours on the knight, that's the even of it.

Nym, thou hast spoke the right, His heart is fracted and corroborate.

The king is a good king: but it must be as it may, he passes some humours and careers.

Let us condole the knight, for, lambkins we will live.

'Fore God, his grace is bold, to trust these traitors.

How smooth and even they do bear themselves! As if allegiance in their bosoms sat, Crowned with faith and constant loyalty.

The king hath note of all that they intend, By interception which they dream not of.

Nay, but the man that was his bedfellow, Whom he hath dull'd and cloy'd with gracious favours, That he should, for a foreign purse, so sell His sovereign's life to death and treachery.

Enter KING HENRY V, SCROOP, CAMBRIDGE, GREY, and Attendants Now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard.

Never was monarch better fear'd and loved Than is your majesty: there's not, I think, a subject That sits in heart-grief and uneasiness Under the sweet shade of your government.

True: those that were your father's enemies Have steep'd their galls in honey and do serve you With hearts create of duty and of zeal.

We therefore have great cause of thankfulness, And shall forget the office of our hand, Sooner than quittance of desert and merit According to the weight and worthiness.

So service shall with steeled sinews toil, And labour shall refresh itself with hope, To do your grace incessant services.

Uncle of Exeter, Enlarge the man committed yesterday, That rail'd against our person: we consider it was excess of wine that set him on, And on his more advice we pardon him.

That's mercy, but too much security: Let him be punish'd, sovereign, lest example Breed, by his sufferance, more of such a kind.

You show great mercy, if you give him life, After the taste of much correction.

And now to our French causes: Who are the late commissioners? I one, my lord: Your highness bade me ask for it to-day.

Then, Richard Earl of Cambridge, there is yours, There yours, Lord Scroop of Masham, and, sir knight, Grey of Northumberland, this same is yours: Read them, and know, I know your worthiness.

My Lord of Westmoreland, and uncle Exeter, We will aboard to night.

Why, how now, gentlemen! What see you in those papers that you lose So much complexion? Look ye, how they change! Their cheeks are paper.

Why, what read you there That hath so cowarded and chased your blood Out of appearance? I do confess my fault, And do submit me to your highness' mercy.

I will weep for thee, For this revolt of thine, methinks, is like Another fall of man.

Their faults are open: Arrest them to the answer of the law, And God acquit them of their practises! I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Richard Earl of Cambridge.

I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Henry Lord Scroop of Masham.

I arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Thomas Grey, knight, of Northumberland.

Our purposes God justly hath discover'd, And I repent my fault more than my death, Which I beseech your highness to forgive, Although my body pay the price of it.

Never did faithful subject more rejoice At the discovery of most dangerous treason Than I do at this hour joy o'er myself.

Prevented from a damned enterprise: My fault, but not my body, pardon, sovereign.

Touching our person seek we no revenge, But we our kingdom's safety must so tender, Whose ruin you have sought, that to her laws We do deliver you.

Get you therefore hence, Poor miserable wretches, to your death: The taste whereof, God of his mercy give You patience to endure, and true repentance Of all your dear offences! Bear them hence.

Now, lords, for France, the enterprise whereof Shall be to you, as us, like glorious.

We doubt not of a fair and lucky war, Since God so graciously hath brought to light This dangerous treason lurking in our way To hinder our beginnings.

We doubt not now But every rub is smoothed on our way.

Then forth, dear countrymen: let us deliver Our puissance into the hand of God, Putting it straight in expedition.

Cheerly to sea, the signs of war advance: No king of England, if not king of France.

Prithee, honey-sweet husband, let me bring thee to Staines.

Bardolph, be blithe: Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins: Boy, bristle thy courage up, for Falstaff he is dead, And we must yearn therefore.

Would I were with him, wheresome'er he is, either in heaven or in hell! Nay, sure, he's not in hell: he's in Arthur's bosom, if ever man went to Arthur's bosom.

'How now, sir John!' quoth I	'what, man! be o' good cheer.

So a' cried out 'God, God, God!' three or four times.

Now I, to comfort him, bid him a' should not think of God, I hoped there was no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet.

Yes, that a' did, and said they were devils A' could never abide carnation, 'twas a colour he never liked.

A' said once, the devil would have him about women.

A' did in some sort, indeed, handle women, but then he was rheumatic, and talked of the whore of Babylon.

Shall we shog? the king will be gone from Come, let's away.

Yoke-fellows in arms, Let us to France, like horse-leeches, my boys, To suck, to suck, the very blood to suck! And that's but unwholesome food they say.

Kissing her I cannot kiss, that is the humour of it, but, adieu.

Let housewifery appear: keep close, I thee command.

It fits us then to be as provident As fear may teach us out of late examples Left by the fatal and neglected English Upon our fields.

Think we King Harry strong, And, princes, look you strongly arm to meet him.

This is a stem Of that victorious stock, and let us fear The native mightiness and fate of him.

Ambassadors from Harry King of England Do crave admittance to your majesty.

Go, and bring them. You see this chase is hotly follow'd, friends.

Turn head, and stop pursuit, for coward dogs Most spend their mouths when what they seem to threaten Runs far before them.

Good my sovereign, Take up the English short, and let them know Of what a monarchy you are the head: Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin As self-neglecting.

Re-enter Lords, with EXETER and train From our brother England? From him, and thus he greets your majesty.

This is his claim, his threatening and my message, Unless the Dauphin be in presence here, To whom expressly I bring greeting too.

For us, we will consider of this further: To-morrow shall you bear our full intent Back to our brother England.

For the Dauphin, I stand here for him: what to him from England? Scorn and defiance, slight regard, contempt, And any thing that may not misbecome The mighty sender, doth he prize you at.

Say, if my father render fair return, It is against my will, for I desire Nothing but odds with England: to that end, As matching to his youth and vanity, I did present him with the Paris balls.

Dispatch us with all speed, lest that our king Come here himself to question our delay, For he is footed in this land already.

You shall be soon dispatch's with fair conditions: A night is but small breath and little pause To answer matters of this consequence.

Exeunt Thus with imagined wing our swift scene flies In motion of no less celerity Than that of thought.

Suppose the ambassador from the French comes back, Tells Harry that the king doth offer him Katharine his daughter, and with her, to dowry, Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms.

The offer likes not: and the nimble gunner With linstock now the devilish cannon touches, Alarum, and chambers go off And down goes all before them.

Still be kind, And eke out our performance with your mind.

Enter KING HENRY, EXETER, BEDFORD, GLOUCESTER, and Soldiers, with scaling-ladders Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more, Or close the wall up with our English dead.

Now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide, Hold hard the breath and bend up every spirit To his full height.

Be copy now to men of grosser blood, And teach them how to war.

I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips, Straining upon the start.

The plain-song is most just: for humours do abound: Knocks go and come, God's vassals drop and die, And sword and shield, In bloody field, Doth win immortal fame.

Would I were in an alehouse in London! I would give all my fame for a pot of ale and safety.

And I: If wishes would prevail with me, My purpose should not fail with me, But thither would I hie.

As duly, but not as truly, As bird doth sing on bough.

Up to the breach, you dogs! avaunt, you cullions! Driving them forward Be merciful, great duke, to men of mould.

Abate thy rage, abate thy manly rage, Abate thy rage, great duke! Good bawcock, bate thy rage, use lenity, sweet chuck! These be good humours! your honour wins bad humours.

As young as I am, I have observed these three swashers.

I am boy to them all three: but all they three, though they would serve me, could not be man to me, for indeed three such antics do not amount to a man.

For Bardolph, he is white-livered and red-faced, by the means whereof a' faces it out, but fights not.

For Pistol, he hath a killing tongue and a quiet sword, by the means whereof a' breaks words, and keeps whole weapons.

Bardolph stole a lute-case, bore it twelve leagues, and sold it for three half pence.

Nym and Bardolph are sworn brothers in filching, and in Calais they stole a fire-shovel: I knew by that piece of service the men would carry coals.

I must leave them, and seek some better service: their villany goes against my weak stomach, and therefore I must cast it up.

Re-enter FLUELLEN, GOWER following Captain Fluellen, you must come presently to the mines, the Duke of Gloucester would speak with you.

The Duke of Gloucester, to whom the order of the siege is given, is altogether directed by an Irishman, a very valiant gentleman, i' faith.

It is Captain Macmorris, is it not? I think it be.

By Cheshu, he is an ass, as in the world: I will verify as much in his beard: be has no more directions in the true disciplines of the wars, look you, of the Roman disciplines, than is a puppy-dog.

Here a' comes, and the Scots captain, Captain Jamy, with him.

How now, Captain Macmorris! have you quit the mines? have the pioneers given o'er? By Chrish, la! tish ill done: the work ish give over, the trompet sound the retreat.

It sall be vary gud, gud feith, gud captains bath: and I sall quit you with gud leve, as I may pick occasion, that sall I, marry.

It is no time to discourse, so Chrish save me: the day is hot, and the weather, and the wars, and the king, and the dukes: it is no time to discourse.

Marry, I wad full fain hear some question 'tween you tway.

Captain Macmorris, I think, look you, under your correction, there is not many of your nation-- Of my nation! What ish my nation? Ish a villain, and a bastard, and a knave, and a rascal.

I do not know you so good a man as myself: so Chrish save me, I will cut off your head.

Captain Macmorris, when there is more better opportunity to be required, look you, I will be so bold as to tell you I know the disciplines of war, and there is an end.

The Governor and some Citizens on the walls, the English forces below.

Therefore, great king, We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy.

Come, uncle Exeter, Go you and enter Harfleur, there remain, And fortify it strongly 'gainst the French: Use mercy to them all.

For us, dear uncle, The winter coming on and sickness growing Upon our soldiers, we will retire to Calais.

To-night in Harfleur we will be your guest, To-morrow for the march are we addrest.

The King and his train enter the town Alice, tu as ete en Angleterre, et tu parles bien le langage.

Je te prie, m'enseignez: il faut que j'apprenne a parler.

Comment appelez-vous la main en Anglois? La main? elle est appelee de hand.

Et les doigts? Les doigts? ma foi, j'oublie les doigts, mais je me souviendrai.

Les doigts? je pense qu'ils sont appeles de fingres, oui, de fingres.

Je pense que je suis le bon ecolier, j'ai gagne deux mots d'Anglois vitement.

Comment appelez-vous les ongles? Les ongles? nous les appelons de nails.

Ecoutez, dites-moi, si je parle bien: de hand, de fingres, et de nails.

Je m'en fais la repetition de tous les mots que vous m'avez appris des a present.

Excusez-moi, Alice, ecoutez: de hand, de fingres, de nails, de arma, de bilbow.

Sauf votre honneur, en verite, vous prononcez les mots aussi droit que les natifs d'Angleterre.

Je ne doute point d'apprendre, par la grace de Dieu, et en peu de temps.

N'avez vous pas deja oublie ce que je vous ai enseigne? Non, je reciterai a vous promptement: de hand, de fingres, de mails-- De nails, madame.

Comment appelez-vous le pied et la robe? De foot, madame, et de coun.

Foh! le foot et le coun! Neanmoins, je reciterai une autre fois ma lecon ensemble: de hand, de fingres, de nails, de arm, de elbow, de nick, de sin, de foot, de coun.

Excellent, madame! C'est assez pour une fois: allons-nous a diner.

And if he be not fought withal, my lord, Let us not live in France, let us quit all And give our vineyards to a barbarous people.

By faith and honour, Our madams mock at us, and plainly say Our mettle is bred out and they will give Their bodies to the lust of English youth To new-store France with bastard warriors.

They bid us to the English dancing-schools, And teach lavoltas high and swift corantos, Saying our grace is only in our heels, And that we are most lofty runaways.

Where is Montjoy the herald? speed him hence: Let him greet England with our sharp defiance.

And let him say to England that we send To know what willing ransom he will give.

Now forth, lord constable and princes all, And quickly bring us word of England's fall.

How now, Captain Fluellen! come you from the bridge? I assure you, there is very excellent services committed at the bridge.

What do you call him? He is called Aunchient Pistol.

Captain, I thee beseech to do me favours: The Duke of Exeter doth love thee well.

Ay, I praise God, and I have merited some love at his hands.

Therefore, go speak: the duke will hear thy voice: And let not Bardolph's vital thread be cut With edge of penny cord and vile reproach: Speak, captain, for his life, and I will thee requite.

Aunchient Pistol, I do partly understand your meaning.

Die and be damn'd! and figo for thy friendship! It is well.

Why, this is an arrant counterfeit rascal, I remember him now, a bawd, a cutpurse.

I'll assure you, a' uttered as brave words at the bridge as you shall see in a summer's day.

But it is very well, what he has spoke to me, that is well, I warrant you, when time is serve.

Why, 'tis a gull, a fool, a rogue, that now and then goes to the wars, to grace himself at his return into London under the form of a soldier.

But you must learn to know such slanders of the age, or else you may be marvellously mistook.

I tell you what, Captain Gower, I do perceive he is not the man that he would gladly make show to the world he is: if I find a hole in his coat, I will tell him my mind.

Drum heard Hark you, the king is coming, and I must speak with him from the pridge.

Enter KING HENRY, GLOUCESTER, and Soldiers God pless your majesty! How now, Fluellen! camest thou from the bridge? Ay, so please your majesty.

Well then I know thee: what shall I know of thee? My master's mind.

Thus says my king: Say thou to Harry of England: Though we seemed dead, we did but sleep: advantage is a better soldier than rashness.

To this add defiance: and tell him, for conclusion, he hath betrayed his followers, whose condemnation is pronounced.

Yet, forgive me, God, That I do brag thus! This your air of France Hath blown that vice in me: I must repent.

The sum of all our answer is but this: We would not seek a battle, as we are, Nor, as we are, we say we will not shun it: So tell your master.

Thanks to your highness. I hope they will not come upon us now.

March to the bridge, it now draws toward night: Beyond the river we'll encamp ourselves, And on to-morrow, bid them march away.

Would it were day! You have an excellent armour, but let my horse have his due.

Will it never be morning? My lord of Orleans, and my lord high constable, you talk of horse and armour? You are as well provided of both as any prince in the world.

What a long night is this! I will not change my horse with any that treads but on four pasterns.

Indeed, my lord, it is a most absolute and excellent horse.

It is the prince of palfreys, his neigh is like the bidding of a monarch and his countenance enforces homage.

I once writ a sonnet in his praise and began thus: 'Wonder of nature,'-- I have heard a sonnet begin so to one's mistress.

Then did they imitate that which I composed to my courser, for my horse is my mistress.

Me well, which is the prescript praise and perfection of a good and particular mistress.

Nay, for methought yesterday your mistress shrewdly shook your back.

O then belike she was old and gentle, and you rode, like a kern of Ireland, your French hose off, and in your straight strossers.

Be warned by me, then: they that ride so and ride not warily, fall into foul bogs.

I tell thee, constable, my mistress wears his own hair.

I could make as true a boast as that, if I had a sow to my mistress.

'Le chien est retourne a son propre vomissement, et la truie lavee au bourbier,' thou makest use of any thing.

Yet do I not use my horse for my mistress, or any such proverb so little kin to the purpose.

My lord constable, the armour that I saw in your tent to-night, are those stars or suns upon it? Stars, my lord.

That may be, for you bear a many superfluously, and 'twere more honour some were away.

Even as your horse bears your praises, who would trot as well, were some of your brags dismounted.

Would I were able to load him with his desert! Will it never be day? I will trot to-morrow a mile, and my way shall be paved with English faces.

I will not say so, for fear I should be faced out of my way: but I would it were morning, for I would fain be about the ears of the English.

Who will go to hazard with me for twenty prisoners? You must first go yourself to hazard, ere you have them.

By the white hand of my lady, he's a gallant prince.

Swear by her foot, that she may tread out the oath.

Nor will do none to-morrow: he will keep that good name still.

I was told that  by one that knows him better than What's he? Marry, he told me so himself, and he said he cared not who knew it He needs not, it is no hidden virtue in him.

By my faith, sir, but it is, never any body saw it but his lackey: 'tis a hooded valour, and when it appears, it will bate.

I will cap that proverb with 'There is flattery in friendship.

And I will take up that with 'Give the devil his due.

Well placed: there stands your friend for the devil: have at the very eye of that proverb with 'A pox of the devil.

You are the better at proverbs, by how much 'A fool's bolt is soon shot.

My lord high constable, the English lie within fifteen hundred paces of your tents.

Would it were day! Alas, poor Harry of England! he longs not for the dawning as we do.

What a wretched and peevish fellow is this king of England, to mope with his fat-brained followers so far out of his knowledge! If the English had any apprehension, they would run away.

That they lack, for if their heads had any intellectual armour, they could never wear such heavy That island of England breeds very valiant creatures, their mastiffs are of unmatchable courage.

Then shall we find to-morrow they have only stomachs to eat and none to fight.

Now is it time to arm: come, shall we about it? It is now two o'clock: but, let me see, by ten We shall have each a hundred Englishmen.

Now entertain conjecture of a time When creeping murmur and the poring dark Fills the wide vessel of the universe.

O now, who will behold The royal captain of this ruin'd band Walking from watch to watch, from tent to tent, Let him cry 'Praise and glory on his head!' For forth he goes and visits all his host.

Bids them good morrow with a modest smile And calls them brothers, friends and countrymen.

And so our scene must to the battle fly, Where--O for pity!--we shall much disgrace With four or five most vile and ragged foils, Right ill-disposed in brawl ridiculous, The name of Agincourt.

Yet sit and see, Minding true things by what their mockeries be.

Gloucester, 'tis true that we are in great danger, The greater therefore should our courage be.

God Almighty! There is some soul of goodness in things evil, Would men observingly distil it out.

Thus may we gather honey from the weed, And make a moral of the devil himself.

Good morrow, old Sir Thomas Erpingham: A good soft pillow for that good white head Were better than a churlish turf of France.

Not so, my liege: this lodging likes me better, Since I may say 'Now lie I like a king.

Brothers both, Commend me to the princes in our camp, Do my good morrow to them, and anon Desire them an to my pavilion.

Shall I attend your grace? No, my good knight, Go with my brothers to my lords of England: I and my bosom must debate awhile, And then I would no other company.

The Lord in heaven bless thee, noble Harry! God-a-mercy, old heart! thou speak'st cheerfully.

Discuss unto me, art thou officer? Or art thou base, common and popular? I am a gentleman of a company.

The king's a bawcock, and a heart of gold, A lad of life, an imp of fame, Of parents good, of fist most valiant.

I kiss his dirty shoe, and from heart-string I love the lovely bully.

Le Roy! a Cornish name: art thou of Cornish crew? No, I am a Welshman.

Know'st thou Fluellen? Tell him, I'll knock his leek about his pate Upon Saint Davy's day.

Do not you wear your dagger in your cap that day, lest he knock that about yours.

The figo for thee, then! I thank you: God be with you! My name is Pistol call'd.

Captain Fluellen! So! in the name of Jesu Christ, speak lower.

Though it appear a little out of fashion, There is much care and valour in this Welshman.

Brother John Bates, is not that the morning which breaks yonder? I think it be: but we have no great cause to desire the approach of day.

We see yonder the beginning of the day, but I think we shall never see the end of it.

Under what captain serve you? Under Sir Thomas Erpingham.

A good old commander and a most kind gentleman: I pray you, what thinks he of our estate? Even as men wrecked upon a sand, that look to be washed off the next tide.

He hath not told his thought to the king? No, nor it is not meet he should.

By my troth, I will speak my conscience of the king: I think he would not wish himself any where but where he is.

Then I would he were here alone, so should he be sure to be ransomed, and a many poor men's lives saved.

Ay, or more than we should seek after, for we know enough, if we know we are the kings subjects: if his cause be wrong, our obedience to the king wipes the crime of it out of us.

Every subject's duty is the king's, but every subject's soul is his own.

'Tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon his own head, the king is not to answer it.

But I do not desire he should answer for me, and yet I determine to fight lustily for him.

I myself heard the king say he would not be ransomed.

Ay, he said so, to make us fight cheerfully: but when our throats are cut, he may be ransomed, and we ne'er the wiser.

If I live to see it, I will never trust his word after.

You'll never trust his word after! come, 'tis a foolish saying.

Your reproof is something too round: I should be angry with you, if the time were convenient.

How shall I know thee again? Give me any gage of thine, and I will wear it in my bonnet: then, if ever thou darest acknowledge it, I will make it my quarrel.

This will I also wear in my cap: if ever thou come to me and say, after to-morrow, 'This is my glove,' by this hand, I will take thee a box on the ear.

I will do it, though I take thee in the king's company.

Be friends, you English fools, be friends: we have French quarrels enow, if you could tell how to reckon.

Upon the king! let us our lives, our souls, Our debts, our careful wives, Our children and our sins lay on the king! We must bear all.

The slave, a member of the country's peace, Enjoys it, but in gross brain little wots What watch the king keeps to maintain the peace, Whose hours the peasant best advantages.

My lord, your nobles, jealous of your absence, Seek through your camp to find you.

Good old knight, Collect them all together at my tent: I'll be before thee.

O God of battles! steel my soldiers' hearts, Possess them not with fear, take from them now The sense of reckoning, if the opposed numbers Pluck their hearts from them.

More will I do, Though all that I can do is nothing worth, Since that my penitence comes after all, Imploring pardon.

My liege! My brother Gloucester's voice? Ay, I know thy errand, I will go with thee: The day, my friends and all things stay for me.

The sun doth gild our armour, up, my lords! Montez A cheval! My horse! varlet! laquais! ha! O brave spirit! Via! les eaux et la terre.

To horse, you gallant princes! straight to horse! Do but behold yon poor and starved band, And your fair show shall suck away their souls, Leaving them but the shales and husks of men.

Then let the trumpets sound The tucket sonance and the note to mount, For our approach shall so much dare the field That England shall couch down in fear and yield.

Description cannot suit itself in words To demonstrate the life of such a battle In life so lifeless as it shows itself.

They have said their prayers, and they stay for death.

Come, come, away! The sun is high, and we outwear the day.

Where is the king? The king himself is rode to view their battle.

Of fighting men they have full three score thousand.

He is full of valour as of kindness, Princely in both.

No, faith, my coz, wish not a man from England: God's peace! I would not lose so great an honour As one man more, methinks, would share from me For the best hope I have.

This day is called the feast of Crispian: He that outlives this day, and comes safe home, Will stand a tip-toe when the day is named, And rouse him at the name of Crispian.

He that shall live this day, and see old age, Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours, And say 'To-morrow is Saint Crispian:' Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars.

Old men forget: yet all shall be forgot, But he'll remember with advantages What feats he did that day: then shall our names.

Familiar in his mouth as household words Harry the king, Bedford and Exeter, Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester, Be in their flowing cups freshly remember'd.

Re-enter SALISBURY My sovereign lord, bestow yourself with speed: The French are bravely in their battles set, And will with all expedience charge on us.

You know your places: God be with you all! Tucket.

I pray thee, bear my former answer back: Bid them achieve me and then sell my bones.

Good God! why should they mock poor fellows thus? The man that once did sell the lion's skin While the beast lived, was killed with hunting him.

Mark then abounding valour in our English, That being dead, like to the bullet's grazing, Break out into a second course of mischief, Killing in relapse of mortality.

If they do this,-- As, if God please, they shall,--my ransom then Will soon be levied.

And so fare thee well: Thou never shalt hear herald any more.

My lord, most humbly on my knee I beg The leading of the vaward.

Now, soldiers, march away: And how thou pleasest, God, dispose the day! Alarum.

Excursions. Enter PISTOL, French Soldier, and Boy Yield, cur! Je pense que vous etes gentilhomme de bonne qualite.

Qualtitie calmie custure me! Art thou a gentleman? what is thy name? discuss.

O Seigneur Dieu! O, Signieur Dew should be a gentleman: Perpend my words, O Signieur Dew, and mark, O Signieur Dew, thou diest on point of fox, Except, O signieur, thou do give to me Egregious ransom.

O, prenez misericorde! ayez pitie de moi! Moy shall not serve, I will have forty moys, Or I will fetch thy rim out at thy throat In drops of crimson blood.

Ecoutez: comment etes-vous appele? Monsieur le Fer.

Master Fer! I'll fer him, and firk him, and ferret him: discuss the same in French unto him.

I do not know the French for fer, and ferret, and firk.

Que dit-il, monsieur? Il me commande de vous dire que vous faites vous pret, car ce soldat ici est dispose tout a cette heure de couper votre gorge.

Owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy, Peasant, unless thou give me crowns, brave crowns, Or mangled shalt thou be by this my sword.

O, je vous supplie, pour l'amour de Dieu, me pardonner! Je suis gentilhomme de bonne maison: gardez ma vie, et je vous donnerai deux cents ecus.

What are his words? He prays you to save his life: he is a gentleman of a good house, and for his ransom he will give you two hundred crowns.

Tell him my fury shall abate, and I the crowns will take.

Sur mes genoux je vous donne mille remercimens, et je m'estime heureux que je suis tombe entre les mains d'un chevalier, je pense, le plus brave, vaillant, et tres distingue seigneur d'Angleterre.

He gives you, upon his knees, a thousand thanks, and he esteems himself happy that he hath fallen into the hands of one, as he thinks, the most brave, valorous, and thrice-worthy signieur of England.

I did never know so full a voice issue from so empty a heart: but the saying is true 'The empty vessel makes the greatest sound.

I must stay with the lackeys, with the luggage of our camp: the French might have a good prey of us, if he knew of it, for there is none to guard it but boys.

O diable! O seigneur! le jour est perdu, tout est perdu! Mort de ma vie! all is confounded, all! Reproach and everlasting shame Sits mocking in our plumes.

Disorder, that hath spoil'd us, friend us now! Let us on heaps go offer up our lives.

We are enow yet living in the field To smother up the English in our throngs, If any order might be thought upon.

The devil take order now! I'll to the throng: Let life be short, else shame will be too long.

Enter KING HENRY and forces, EXETER, and others Well have we done, thrice valiant countrymen: But all's not done, yet keep the French the field.

Lives he, good uncle? thrice within this hour I saw him down, thrice up again and fighting, From helmet to the spur all blood he was.

In which array, brave soldier, doth he lie, Larding the plain, and by his bloody side, Yoke-fellow to his honour-owing wounds, The noble Earl of Suffolk also lies.

So did he turn and over Suffolk's neck He threw his wounded arm and kiss'd his lips, And so espoused to death, with blood he seal'd A testament of noble-ending love.

The pretty and sweet manner of it forced Those waters from me which I would have stopp'd, But I had not so much of man in me, And all my mother came into mine eyes And gave me up to tears.

I blame you not, For, hearing this, I must perforce compound With mistful eyes, or they will issue too.

But, hark! what new alarum is this same? The French have reinforced their scatter'd men: Then every soldier kill his prisoners: Give the word through.

O, 'tis a gallant king! Ay, he was porn at Monmouth, Captain Gower.

What call you the town's name where Alexander the Pig was born! Alexander the Great.

Why, I pray you, is not pig great? the pig, or the great, or the mighty, or the huge, or the magnanimous, are all one reckonings, save the phrase is a little variations.

I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon, his father was called Philip of Macedon, as I take it.

I tell you, captain, if you look in the maps of the 'orld, I warrant you sall find, in the comparisons between Macedon and Monmouth, that the situations, look you, is both alike.

If you mark Alexander's life well, Harry of Monmouth's life is come after it indifferent well, for there is figures in all things.

Our king is not like him in that: he never killed any of his friends.

It is not well done, mark you now take the tales out of my mouth, ere it is made and finished.

That is he: I'll tell you there is good men porn at Monmouth.

Enter KING HENRY, and forces, WARWICK, GLOUCESTER, EXETER, and others I was not angry since I came to France Until this instant.

Go and tell them so. Here comes the herald of the French, my liege.

Praised be God, and not our strength, for it! What is this castle call'd that stands hard by? They call it Agincourt.

Then call we this the field of Agincourt, Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.

Your grandfather of famous memory, an't please your majesty, and your great-uncle Edward the Plack Prince of Wales, as I have read in the chronicles, fought a most prave pattle here in France.

I wear it for a memorable honour, For I am Welsh, you know, good countryman.

God keep me so! Our heralds go with him: Bring me just notice of the numbers dead On both our parts.

Exeunt Heralds with Montjoy Soldier, you must come to the king.

Soldier, why wearest thou that glove in thy cap? An't please your majesty, 'tis the gage of one that I should fight withal, if he be alive.

What think you, Captain Fluellen? is it fit this soldier keep his oath? He is a craven and a villain else, an't please your majesty, in my conscience.

It may be his enemy is a gentleman of great sort, quite from the answer of his degree.

Who servest thou under? Under Captain Gower, my liege.

Gower is a good captain, and is good knowledge and literatured in the wars.

Knowest thou Gower? He is my dear friend, an please you.

God's will and his pleasure, captain, I beseech you now, come apace to the king: there is more good toward you peradventure than is in your knowledge to dream of.

Sir, know you this glove? Know the glove! I know the glove is glove.

I charge you in his majesty's name, apprehend him: he's a friend of the Duke Alencon's.

How now, how now! what's the matter? My Lord of Warwick, here is--praised be God for it! --a most contagious treason come to light, look you, as you shall desire in a summer's day.

How now! what's the matter? My liege, here is a villain and a traitor, that, look your grace, has struck the glove which your majesty is take out of the helmet of Alencon.

'Twas I, indeed, thou promised'st to strike, And thou hast given me most bitter terms.

An please your majesty, let his neck answer for it, if there is any martial law in the world.

How canst thou make me satisfaction? All offences, my lord, come from the heart: never came any from mine that might offend your majesty.

Here, uncle Exeter, fill this glove with crowns, And give it to this fellow.

Keep it, fellow, And wear it for an honour in thy cap Till I do challenge it.

Give him the crowns: And, captain, you must needs be friends with him.

By this day and this light, the fellow has mettle enough in his belly.

Hold, there is twelve pence for you, and I pray you to serve Got, and keep you out of prawls, and prabbles' and quarrels, and dissensions, and, I warrant you, it is the better for you.

Now, herald, are the dead number'd? Here is the number of the slaughter'd French.

And be it death proclaimed through our host To boast of this or take the praise from God Which is his only.

Is it not lawful, an please your majesty, to tell how many is killed? Yes, captain, but with this acknowledgement, That God fought for us.

Do we all holy rites, Let there be sung 'Non nobis' and 'Te Deum,' The dead with charity enclosed in clay: And then to Calais, and to England then: Where ne'er from France arrived more happy men.

Now we bear the king Toward Calais: grant him there, there seen, Heave him away upon your winged thoughts Athwart the sea.

Then brook abridgment, and your eyes advance, After your thoughts, straight back again to France.

Nay, that's right, but why wear you your leek today? Saint Davy's day is past.

'Tis no matter for his swellings nor his turkey-cocks.

Strikes him Will you be so good, scauld knave, as eat it? Base Trojan, thou shalt die.

You say very true, scauld knave, when God's will is: I will desire you to live in the mean time, and eat your victuals: come, there is sauce for it.

Strikes him You called me yesterday mountain-squire, but I will make you to-day a squire of low degree.

I pray you, fall to: if you can mock a leek, you can eat a leek.

I say, I will make him eat some part of my leek, or I will peat his pate four days.

Bite, I pray you, it is good for your green wound and your ploody coxcomb.

Must I bite? Yes, certainly, and out of doubt and out of question too, and ambiguities.

By this leek, I will most horribly revenge: I eat and eat, I swear-- Eat, I pray you: will you have some more sauce to your leek? there is not enough leek to swear by.

Nay, pray you, throw none away, the skin is good for your broken coxcomb.

When you take occasions to see leeks hereafter, I pray you, mock at 'em, that is all.

Ay, leeks is good: hold you, there is a groat to heal your pate.

Me a groat! Yes, verily and in truth, you shall take it, or I have another leek in my pocket, which you shall eat.

If I owe you any thing, I will pay you in cudgels: you shall be a woodmonger, and buy nothing of me but cudgels.

God b' wi' you, and keep you, and heal your pate. All hell shall stir for this.

Fare ye well. Doth Fortune play the huswife with me now? News have I, that my Nell is dead i' the spital Of malady of France, And there my rendezvous is quite cut off.

Old I do wax, and from my weary limbs Honour is cudgelled.

Well, bawd I'll turn, And something lean to cutpurse of quick hand.

To England will I steal, and there I'll steal: And patches will I get unto these cudgell'd scars, And swear I got them in the Gallia wars.

Which to reduce into our former favour You are assembled: and my speech entreats That I may know the let, why gentle Peace Should not expel these inconveniences And bless us with her former qualities.

The king hath heard them, to the which as yet There is no answer made.

Well then the peace, Which you before so urged, lies in his answer.

Will you, fair sister, Go with the princes, or stay here with us? Our gracious brother, I will go with them: Haply a woman's voice may do some good, When articles too nicely urged be stood on.

Yet leave our cousin Katharine here with us: She is our capital demand, comprised Within the fore-rank of our articles.

O fair Katharine, if you will love me soundly with your French heart, I will be glad to hear you confess it brokenly with your English tongue.

Do you like me, Kate? Pardonnez-moi, I cannot tell vat is 'like me.

An angel is like you, Kate, and you are like an angel.

Que dit-il? que je suis semblable a les anges? Oui, vraiment, sauf votre grace, ainsi dit-il.

I said so, dear Katharine, and I must not blush to affirm it.

O bon Dieu! les langues des hommes sont pleines de What says she, fair one? that the tongues of men are full of deceits? Oui, dat de tongues of de mans is be full of deceits: dat is de princess.

I know no ways to mince it in love, but directly to say 'I love you:' then if you urge me farther than to say 'do you in faith?' I wear out my suit.

Give me your answer, i' faith, do: and so clap hands and a bargain: how say you, lady? Sauf votre honneur, me understand vell.

If I could win a lady at leap-frog, or by vaulting into my saddle with my armour on my back, under the correction of bragging be it spoken.

I should quickly leap into a wife. Or if I might buffet for my love, or bound my horse for her favours, I could lay on like a butcher and sit like a jack-an-apes, never off.

But, before God, Kate, I cannot look greenly nor gasp out my eloquence, nor I have no cunning in protestation, only downright oaths, which I never use till urged, nor never break for urging.

If thou canst love a fellow of this temper, Kate, whose face is not worth sun-burning, that never looks in his glass for love of any thing he sees there, let thine eye be thy cook.

I speak to thee plain soldier: If thou canst love me for this, take me: if not, to say to thee that I shall die, is true, but for thy love, by the Lord, no, yet I love thee too.

What! a speaker is but a prater, a rhyme is but a ballad.

If thou would have such a one, take me, and take me, take a soldier, take a soldier, take a king.

And what sayest thou then to my love? speak, my fair, and fairly, I pray thee.

No, Kate? I will tell thee in French, which I am sure will hang upon my tongue like a new-married wife about her husband's neck, hardly to be shook off.

Je quand sur le possession de France, et quand vous avez le possession de moi,--let me see, what then? Saint Denis be my speed!--donc votre est France et vous etes mienne.

It is as easy for me, Kate, to conquer the kingdom as to speak so much more French: I shall never move thee in French, unless it be to laugh at me.

Sauf votre honneur, le Francois que vous parlez, il est meilleur que l'Anglois lequel je parle.

No, faith, is't not, Kate: but thy speaking of my tongue, and I thine, most truly-falsely, must needs be granted to be much at one.

But, Kate, dost thou understand thus much English, canst thou love me? I cannot tell.

Can any of your neighbours tell, Kate? I'll ask them.

How answer you, la plus belle Katharine du monde, mon tres cher et devin deesse? Your majestee ave fausse French enough to deceive de most sage demoiselle dat is en France.

Nay, it will please him well, Kate it shall please him, Kate.

Upon that I kiss your hand, and I call you my queen.

Les dames et demoiselles pour etre baisees devant leur noces, il n'est pas la coutume de France.

Madam my interpreter, what says she? Dat it is not be de fashion pour les ladies of France,--I cannot tell vat is baiser en Anglish.

It is not a fashion for the maids in France to kiss before they are married, would she say? Oui, vraiment.

Pardon the frankness of my mirth, if I answer you for that.

If you would conjure in her, you must make a circle, if conjure up love in her in his true likeness, he must appear naked and blind.

Yet they do wink and yield, as love is blind and enforces.

They are then excused, my lord, when they see not what they do.

Then, good my lord, teach your cousin to consent winking.

This moral ties me over to time and a hot summer, and so I shall catch the fly, your cousin, in the latter end and she must be blind too.

It is so: and you may, some of you, thank love for my blindness, who cannot see many a fair French city for one fair French maid that stands in my way.

Yes, my lord, you see them perspectively, the cities turned into a maid, for they are all girdled with maiden walls that war hath never entered.

I am content, so the maiden cities you talk of may wait on her: so the maid that stood in the way for my wish shall show me the way to my will.

Is't so, my lords of England? The king hath granted every article: His daughter first, and then in sequel all, According to their firm proposed natures.

Nor this I have not, brother, so denied, But your request shall make me let it pass.

I pray you then, in love and dear alliance, Let that one article rank with the rest, And thereupon give me your daughter.

Now, welcome, Kate: and bear me witness all, That here I kiss her as my sovereign queen.

God speak this Amen! Prepare we for our marriage--on which day, My Lord of Burgundy, we'll take your oath, And all the peers', for surety of our leagues.

Then shall I swear to Kate, and you to me, And may our oaths well kept and prosperous be! Sennet.

Exeunt Thus far, with rough and all-unable pen, Our bending author hath pursued the story, In little room confining mighty men, Mangling by starts the full course of their glory.

Small time, but in that small most greatly lived This star of England: Fortune made his sword, By which the world's best garden be achieved, And of it left his son imperial lord.

I come no more to make you laugh: things now, That bear a weighty and a serious brow, Sad, high, and working, full of state and woe, Such noble scenes as draw the eye to flow, We now present.

Those that can pity, here May, if they think it well, let fall a tear, The subject will deserve it.

Such as give Their money out of hope they may believe, May here find truth too.

Those that come to see Only a show or two, and so agree The play may pass, if they be still and willing, I'll undertake may see away their shilling Richly in two short hours.

How have ye done Since last we saw in France? I thank your grace, Healthful, and ever since a fresh admirer Of what I saw there.

An untimely ague Stay'd me a prisoner in my chamber when Those suns of glory, those two lights of men, Met in the vale of Andren.

Then you lost The view of earthly glory: men might say, Till this time pomp was single, but now married To one above itself.

Each following day Became the next day's master, till the last Made former wonders its.

To-day the French, All clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods, Shone down the English, and, to-morrow, they Made Britain India: every man that stood Show'd like a mine.

As I belong to worship and affect In honour honesty, the tract of every thing Would by a good discourser lose some life, Which action's self was tongue to.

All was royal, To the disposing of it nought rebell'd.

Order gave each thing view, the office did Distinctly his full function.

Who did guide, I mean, who set the body and the limbs Of this great sport together, as you guess? One, certes, that promises no element In such a business.

I pray you, who, my lord? All this was order'd by the good discretion Of the right reverend Cardinal of York.

The devil speed him! no man's pie is freed From his ambitious finger.

What had he To do in these fierce vanities? I wonder That such a keech can with his very bulk Take up the rays o' the beneficial sun And keep it from the earth.

I do know Kinsmen of mine, three at the least, that have By this so sickened their estates, that never They shall abound as formerly.

O, many Have broke their backs with laying manors on 'em For this great journey.

What did this vanity But minister communication of A most poor issue? Grievingly I think, The peace between the French and us not values The cost that did conclude it.

Which is budded out, For France hath flaw'd the league, and hath attach'd Our merchants' goods at Bourdeaux.

Is it therefore The ambassador is silenced? Marry, is't.

A proper title of a peace, and purchased At a superfluous rate! Why, all this business Our reverend cardinal carried.

Like it your grace, The state takes notice of the private difference Betwixt you and the cardinal.

You know his nature, That he's revengeful, and I know his sword Hath a sharp edge: it's long and, 't may be said, It reaches far, and where 'twill not extend, Thither he darts it.

Lo, where comes that rock That I advise your shunning.

The Duke of Buckingham's surveyor, ha? Where's his examination? Here, so please you.

Well, we shall then know more, and Buckingham Shall lessen this big look.

This butcher's cur is venom-mouth'd, and I Have not the power to muzzle him, therefore best Not wake him in his slumber.

What, are you chafed? Ask God for temperance, that's the appliance only Which your disease requires.

I read in's looks Matter against me, and his eye reviled Me, as his abject object: at this instant He bores me with some trick: he's gone to the king, I'll follow and outstare him.

Not a man in England Can advise me like you: be to yourself As you would to your friend.

I'll to the king, And from a mouth of honour quite cry down This Ipswich fellow's insolence, or proclaim There's difference in no persons.

Be advised, Heat not a furnace for your foe so hot That it do singe yourself: we may outrun, By violent swiftness, that which we run at, And lose by over-running.

To the king I'll say't, and make my vouch as strong As shore of rock.

Let the king know, As soon he shall by me, that thus the cardinal Does buy and sell his honour as he pleases, And for his own advantage.

I am sorry To hear this of him, and could wish he were Something mistaken in't.

No, not a syllable: I  do pronounce him in that very shape He shall appear in proof.

My lord the Duke of Buckingham, and Earl Of Hereford, Stafford, and Northampton, I Arrest thee of high treason, in the name Of our most sovereign king.

Lo, you, my lord, The net has fall'n upon me! I shall perish Under device and practise.

I am sorry To see you ta'en from liberty, to look on The business present: 'tis his highness' pleasure You shall to the Tower.

It will help me nothing To plead mine innocence, for that dye is on me Which makes my whitest part black.

The will of heaven Be done in this and all things! I obey.

O my Lord Abergavenny, fare you well! Nay, he must bear you company.

The king To ABERGAVENNY Is pleased you shall to the Tower, till you know How he determines further.

Let be call'd before us That gentleman of Buckingham's, in person I'll hear him his confessions justify, And point by point the treasons of his master He shall again relate.

A noise within, crying 'Room for the Queen!' Enter  QUEEN KATHARINE, ushered by NORFOLK, and SUFFOLK:  she kneels.

KING HENRY VIII riseth from his state, takes her up, kisses and placeth her by him Nay, we must longer kneel: I am a suitor.

Arise, and take place by us: half your suit Never name to us, you have half our power: The other moiety, ere you ask, is given, Repeat your will and take it.

That you would love yourself, and in that love Not unconsider'd leave your honour, nor The dignity of your office, is the point Of my petition.

No, my lord, You know no more than others, but you frame Things that are known alike, which are not wholesome To those which would not know them, and yet must Perforce be their acquaintance.

These exactions, Whereof my sovereign would have note, they are Most pestilent to the bearing, and, to bear 'em, The back is sacrifice to the load.

They say They are devised by you, or else you suffer Too hard an exclamation.

Still exaction! The nature of it? in what kind, let's know, Is this exaction? I am much too venturous In tempting of your patience, but am bolden'd Under your promised pardon.

I would your highness Would give it quick consideration, for There is no primer business.

And for me, I have no further gone in this than by A single voice, and that not pass'd me but By learned approbation of the judges.

We must not stint Our necessary actions, in the fear To cope malicious censurers, which ever, As ravenous fishes, do a vessel follow That is new-trimm'd, but benefit no further Than vainly longing.

What we oft do best, By sick interpreters, once weak ones, is Not ours, or not allow'd, what worst, as oft, Hitting a grosser quality, is cried up For our best act.

If we shall stand still, In fear our motion will be mock'd or carp'd at, We should take root here where we sit, or sit State-statues only.

Things done well, And with a care, exempt themselves from fear, Things done without example, in their issue Are to be fear'd.

Have you a precedent Of this commission? I believe, not any.

We must not rend our subjects from our laws, And stick them in our will.

Sixth part of each? A trembling contribution! Why, we take From every tree lop, bark, and part o' the timber, And, though we leave it with a root, thus hack'd, The air will drink the sap.

To every county Where this is question'd send our letters, with Free pardon to each man that has denied The force of this commission: pray, look to't, I put it to your care.

To the Secretary Let there be letters writ to every shire, Of the king's grace and pardon.

The grieved commons Hardly conceive of me, let it be noised That through our intercession this revokement And pardon comes: I shall anon advise you Further in the proceeding.

I am sorry that the Duke of Buckingham Is run in your displeasure.

Yet see, When these so noble benefits shall prove Not well disposed, the mind growing once corrupt, They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly Than ever they were fair.

Sit by us, you shall hear-- This was his gentleman in trust--of him Things to strike honour sad.

Bid him recount The fore-recited practises, whereof We cannot feel too little, hear too much.

Stand forth, and with bold spirit relate what you, Most like a careful subject, have collected Out of the Duke of Buckingham.

Please your highness, note This dangerous conception in this point.

Not friended by by his wish, to your high person His will is most malignant, and it stretches Beyond you, to your friends.

My learn'd lord cardinal, Deliver all with charity.

Speak on: How grounded he his title to the crown, Upon our fail? to this point hast thou heard him At any time speak aught? He was brought to this By a vain prophecy of Nicholas Hopkins.

What was that Hopkins? Sir, a Chartreux friar, His confessor, who fed him every minute With words of sovereignty.

Ha! what, so rank? Ah ha! There's mischief in this man: canst thou say further? I can, my liege.

Being at Greenwich, After your highness had reproved the duke About Sir William Blomer,-- I remember Of such a time: being my sworn servant, The duke retain'd him his.

He is attach'd, Call him to present trial: if he may Find mercy in the law, 'tis his: if none, Let him not seek 't of us: by day and night, He's traitor to the height.

Is't possible the spells of France should juggle Men into such strange mysteries? New customs, Though they be never so ridiculous, Nay, let 'em be unmanly, yet are follow'd.

They have all new legs, and lame ones: one would take it, That never saw 'em pace before, the spavin Or springhalt reign'd among 'em.

Death! my lord, Their clothes are after such a pagan cut too, That, sure, they've worn out Christendom.

How now! What news, Sir Thomas Lovell? Faith, my lord, I hear of none, but the new proclamation That's clapp'd upon the court-gate.

What is't for? The reformation of our travell'd gallants, That fill the court with quarrels, talk, and tailors.

I'm glad 'tis there: now I would pray our monsieurs To think an English courtier may be wise, And never see the Louvre.

'Tis time to give 'em physic, their diseases Are grown so catching.

Well said, Lord Sands, Your colt's tooth is not cast yet.

Sir Thomas, Whither were you a-going? To the cardinal's: Your lordship is a guest too.

O, 'tis true: This night he makes a supper, and a great one, To many lords and ladies, there will be The beauty of this kingdom, I'll assure you.

That churchman bears a bounteous mind indeed, A hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us, His dews fall every where.

No doubt he's noble, He had a black mouth that said other of him.

He may, my lord, has wherewithal: in him Sparing would show a worse sin than ill doctrine: Men of his way should be most liberal, They are set here for examples.

True, they are so: But few now give so great ones.

Come, good Sir Thomas, We shall be late else, which I would not be, For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guildford This night to be comptrollers.

O, my lord, you're tardy: The very thought of this fair company Clapp'd wings to me.

O, that your lordship were but now confessor To one or two of these! I would I were, They should find easy penance.

Faith, how easy? As easy as a down-bed would afford it.

Sweet ladies, will it please you sit? Sir Harry, Place you that side, I'll take the charge of this: His grace is entering.

Nay, you must not freeze, Two women placed together makes cold weather: My Lord Sands, you are one will keep 'em waking, Pray, sit between these ladies.

By your leave, sweet ladies: If I chance to talk a little wild, forgive me, I had it from my father.

Was he mad, sir? O, very mad, exceeding mad, in love too: But he would bite none, just as I do now, He would kiss you twenty with a breath.

Gentlemen, The penance lies on you, if these fair ladies Pass away frowning.

Your grace is noble: Let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks, And save me so much talking.

My Lord Sands, I am beholding to you: cheer your neighbours.

Ladies, you are not merry: gentlemen, Whose fault is this? The red wine first must rise In their fair cheeks, my lord, then we shall have 'em Talk us to silence.

Here's to your ladyship: and pledge it, madam, For 'tis to such a thing,-- You cannot show me.

Drum and trumpet, chambers discharged What's that? Look out there, some of ye.

What warlike voice, And to what end is this? Nay, ladies, fear not, By all the laws of war you're privileged.

Re-enter Servant How now! what is't? A noble troop of strangers, For so they seem: they've left their barge and landed, And hither make, as great ambassadors From foreign princes.

Some attend him. You have now a broken banquet, but we'll mend it.

A good digestion to you all: and once more I shower a welcome on ye, welcome all.

Say, lord chamberlain, They have done my poor house grace, for which I pay 'em A thousand thanks, and pray 'em take their pleasures.

KING HENRY VIII chooses ANNE The fairest hand I ever touch'd! O beauty, Till now I never knew thee! Music.

Whispers the Masquers What say they? Such a one, they all confess, There is indeed, which they would have your grace Find out, and he will take it.

By all your good leaves, gentlemen, here I'll make My royal choice.

Ye have found him, cardinal: You hold a fair assembly, you do well, lord: You are a churchman, or, I'll tell you, cardinal, I should judge now unhappily.

My lord chamberlain, Prithee, come hither: what fair lady's that? An't please your grace, Sir Thomas Bullen's daughter-- The Viscount Rochford,--one of her highness' women.

Sweetheart, I were unmannerly, to take you out, And not to kiss you.

Sir Thomas Lovell, is the banquet ready I' the privy chamber? Yes, my lord.

Your grace, I fear, with dancing is a little heated.

There's fresher air, my lord, In the next chamber.

Let the music knock it. Whither away so fast? O, God save ye! Even to the hall, to hear what shall become Of the great Duke of Buckingham.

All's now done, but the ceremony Of bringing back the prisoner.

Is he found guilty? Yes, truly is he, and condemn'd upon't.

But, pray, how pass'd it? I'll tell you in a little.

The great duke Came to the bar, where to his accusations He pleaded still not guilty and alleged Many sharp reasons to defeat the law.

That was he That fed him with his prophecies? The same.

All these accused him strongly, which he fain Would have flung from him, but, indeed, he could not: And so his peers, upon this evidence, Have found him guilty of high treason.

Much He spoke, and learnedly, for life, but all Was either pitied in him or forgotten.

Sure, he does not: He never was so womanish, the cause He may a little grieve at.

'Tis likely, By all conjectures: first, Kildare's attainder, Then deputy of Ireland, who removed, Earl Surrey was sent thither, and in haste too, Lest he should help his father.

This is noted, And generally, whoever the king favours, The cardinal instantly will find employment, And far enough from court too.

All good people, You that thus far have come to pity me, Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me.

For further life in this world I ne'er hope, Nor will I sue, although the king have mercies More than I dare make faults.

Lead on, o' God's name. I do beseech your grace, for charity, If ever any malice in your heart Were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.

Sir Thomas Lovell, I as free forgive you As I would be forgiven: I forgive all, There cannot be those numberless offences 'Gainst me, that I cannot take peace with: no black envy Shall mark my grave.

Prepare there, The duke is coming: see the barge be ready, And fit it with such furniture as suits The greatness of his person.

Nay, Sir Nicholas, Let it alone, my state now will but mock me.

Now his son, Henry the Eighth, life, honour, name and all That made me happy at one stroke has taken For ever from the world.

All good people, Pray for me! I must now forsake ye: the last hour Of my long weary life is come upon me.

Farewell: And when you would say something that is sad, Speak how I fell.

I have done, and God forgive me! O, this is full of pity! Sir, it calls, I fear, too many curses on their beads That were the authors.

If the duke be guiltless, 'Tis full of woe: yet I can give you inkling Of an ensuing evil, if it fall, Greater than this.

Good angels keep it from us! What may it be? You do not doubt my faith, sir? This secret is so weighty, 'twill require A strong faith to conceal it.

But that slander, sir, Is found a truth now: for it grows again Fresher than e'er it was, and held for certain The king will venture at it.

'Tis the cardinal, And merely to revenge him on the emperor For not bestowing on him, at his asking, The archbishopric of Toledo, this is purposed.

I think you have hit the mark: but is't not cruel That she should feel the smart of this? The cardinal Will have his will, and she must fall.

We are too open here to argue this, Let's think in private more.

'My lord, the horses your lordship sent for, with all the care I had, I saw well chosen, ridden, and furnished.

They were young and handsome, and of the best breed in the north.

I fear he will indeed: well, let him have them: He will have all, I think.

How is the king employ'd? I left him private, Full of sad thoughts and troubles.

What's the cause? It seems the marriage with his brother's wife Has crept too near his conscience.

No, his conscience Has crept too near another lady.

'Tis so: This is the cardinal's doing, the king-cardinal: That blind priest, like the eldest son of fortune, Turns what he list.

The king will know him one day. Pray God he do! he'll never know himself else.

Heaven will one day open The king's eyes, that so long have slept upon This bold bad man.

I knew him, and I know him, so I leave him To him that made him proud, the pope.

To CARDINAL CAMPEIUS You're welcome, Most learned reverend sir, into our kingdom: Use us and it.

To CARDINAL WOLSEY My good lord, have great care I be not found a talker.

I would your grace would give us but an hour Of private conference.

This priest has no pride in him? I would not be so sick though for his place: But this cannot continue.

And once more in mine arms I bid him welcome, And thank the holy conclave for their loves: They have sent me such a man I would have wish'd for.

Your grace must needs deserve all strangers' loves, You are so noble.

To your highness' hand I tender my commission, by whose virtue, The court of Rome commanding, you, my lord Cardinal of York, are join'd with me their servant In the unpartial judging of this business.

The queen shall be acquainted Forthwith for what you come.

Where's Gardiner? I know your majesty has always loved her So dear in heart, not to deny her that A woman of less place might ask by law: Scholars allow'd freely to argue for her.

Ay, and the best she shall have, and my favour To him that does best: God forbid else.

Cardinal, Prithee, call Gardiner to me, my new secretary: I find him a fit fellow.

Re-enter CARDINAL WOLSEY, with GARDINER favour to you, You are the king's now.

But to be commanded For ever by your grace, whose hand has raised me.

Walks and whispers My Lord of York, was not one Doctor Pace In this man's place before him? Yes, he was.

Believe me, there's an ill opinion spread then Even of yourself, lord cardinal.

How! of me? They will not stick to say you envied him, And fearing he would rise, he was so virtuous, Kept him a foreign man still, which so grieved him, That he ran mad and died.

Heaven's peace be with him! That's Christian care enough: for living murmurers There's places of rebuke.

He was a fool, For he would needs be virtuous: that good fellow, If I command him, follows my appointment: I will have none so near else.

Learn this, brother, We live not to be grip'd by meaner persons.

The most convenient place that I can think of For such receipt of learning is Black-Friars, There ye shall meet about this weighty business.

O, my lord, Would it not grieve an able man to leave So sweet a bedfellow? But, conscience, conscience! O, 'tis a tender place, and I must leave her.

Hearts of most hard temper Melt and lament for her.

O, God's will! much better She ne'er had known pomp: though't be temporal, Yet, if that quarrel, fortune, do divorce It from the bearer, 'tis a sufferance panging As soul and body's severing.

Verily, I swear, 'tis better to be lowly born, And range with humble livers in content, Than to be perk'd up in a glistering grief, And wear a golden sorrow.

By my troth and maidenhead, I would not be a queen.

Yes, troth, and troth, you would not be a queen? No, not for all the riches under heaven.

Old Lady:	'Tis strange: a three-pence bow'd would hire me, Old as I am, to queen it: but, I pray you, What think you of a duchess? have you limbs To bear that load of title? No, in truth.

Then you are weakly made: pluck off a little, I would not be a young count in your way, For more than blushing comes to: if your back Cannot vouchsafe this burthen,'tis too weak Ever to get a boy.

How you do talk! I swear again, I would not be a queen For all the world.

In faith, for little England You'ld venture an emballing: I myself Would for Carnarvonshire, although there long'd No more to the crown but that.

What were't worth to know The secret of your conference? My good lord, Not your demand, it values not your asking: Our mistress' sorrows we were pitying.

It was a gentle business, and becoming The action of good women: there is hope All will be well.

Now, I pray God, amen! You bear a gentle mind, and heavenly blessings Follow such creatures.

Beseech your lordship, Vouchsafe to speak my thanks and my obedience, As from a blushing handmaid, to his highness, Whose health and royalty I pray for.

I shall not fail to approve the fair conceit The king hath of you.

There was a lady once, 'tis an old story, That would not be a queen, that would she not, For all the mud in Egypt: have you heard it? Come, you are pleasant.

The Marchioness of Pembroke! A thousand pounds a year for pure respect! No other obligation! By my life, That promises moe thousands: honour's train Is longer than his foreskirt.

By this time I know your back will bear a duchess: say, Are you not stronger than you were? Good lady, Make yourself mirth with your particular fancy, And leave me out on't.

Would I had no being, If this salute my blood a jot: it faints me, To think what follows.

The queen is comfortless, and we forgetful In our long absence: pray, do not deliver What here you've heard to her.

What do you think me? Trumpets, sennet, and cornets.

What's the need? It hath already publicly been read, And on all sides the authority allow'd, You may, then, spare that time.

Proceed. Say, Henry King of England, come into the court.

Say, Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.

His grace Hath spoken well and justly: therefore, madam, It's fit this royal session do proceed, And that, without delay, their arguments Be now produced and heard.

Your pleasure, madam? I am about to weep, but, thinking that We are a queen, or long have dream'd so, certain The daughter of a king, my drops of tears I'll turn to sparks of fire.

I will, when you are humble, nay, before, Or God will punish me.

I do profess You speak not like yourself, who ever yet Have stood to charity, and display'd the effects Of disposition gentle, and of wisdom O'ertopping woman's power.

If he know That I am free of your report, he knows I am not of your wrong.

My lord, my lord, I am a simple woman, much too weak To oppose your cunning.

You're meek and You sign your place and calling, in full seeming, With meekness and humility, but your heart Is cramm'd with arrogancy, spleen, and pride.

She curtsies to KING HENRY VIII, and offers to depart The queen is obstinate, Stubborn to justice, apt to accuse it, and Disdainful to be tried by't: 'tis not well.

What need you note it? pray you, keep your way: When you are call'd, return.

Now, the Lord help, They vex me past my patience! Pray you, pass on: I will not tarry, no, nor ever more Upon this business my appearance make In any of their courts.

You are not to be taught That you have many enemies, that know not Why they are so, but, like to village-curs, Bark when their fellows do: by some of these The queen is put in anger.

Now, what moved me to't, I will be bold with time and your attention: Then mark the inducement.

I have spoke long: be pleased yourself to say How far you satisfied me.

These cardinals trifle with me: I abhor This dilatory sloth and tricks of Rome.

My learn'd and well-beloved servant, Cranmer, Prithee, return: with thy approach, I know, My comfort comes along.

Take thy lute, wench: my soul grows sad with troubles, Sing, and disperse 'em, if thou canst: leave working.

Orpheus with his lute made trees, And the mountain tops that freeze, Bow themselves when he did sing: To his music plants and flowers Ever sprung, as sun and showers There had made a lasting spring.

Every thing that heard him play, Even the billows of the sea, Hung their heads, and then lay by.

In sweet music is such art, Killing care and grief of heart Fall asleep, or hearing, die.

How now! An't please your grace, the two great cardinals Wait in the presence.

Would they speak with me? They will'd me say so, madam.

What can be their business With me, a poor weak woman, fall'n from favour? I do not like their coming.

Now I think on't, They should be good men, their affairs as righteous: But all hoods make not monks.

Peace to your highness! Your graces find me here part of a housewife, I would be all, against the worst may happen.

What are your pleasures with me, reverend lords? May it please you noble madam, to withdraw Into your private chamber, we shall give you The full cause of our coming.

If your business Seek me out, and that way I am wife in, Out with it boldly: truth loves open dealing.

Noble lady, I am sorry my integrity should breed, And service to his majesty and you, So deep suspicion, where all faith was meant.

I was set at work Among my maids: full little, God knows, looking Either for such men or such business.

I would your grace Would leave your griefs, and take my counsel.

Ye tell me what ye wish for both,--my ruin: Is this your Christian counsel? out upon ye! Heaven is above all yet, there sits a judge That no king can corrupt.

The more shame for ye: holy men I thought ye, Upon my soul, two reverend cardinal virtues, But cardinal sins and hollow hearts I fear ye: Mend 'em, for shame, my lords.

Madam, this is a mere distraction, You turn the good we offer into envy.

What can happen To me above this wretchedness? all your studies Make me a curse like this.

Bring me a constant woman to her husband, One that ne'er dream'd a joy beyond his pleasure, And to that woman, when she has done most, Yet will I add an honour, a great patience.

My lord, I dare not make myself so guilty, To give up willingly that noble title Your master wed me to: nothing but death Shall e'er divorce my dignities.

Would I had never trod this English earth, Or felt the flatteries that grow upon it! Ye have angels' faces, but heaven knows your hearts.

What will become of me now, wretched lady! I am the most unhappy woman living.

For goodness' sake, consider what you do, How you may hurt yourself, ay, utterly Grow from the king's acquaintance, by this carriage.

The hearts of princes kiss obedience, So much they love it, but to stubborn spirits They swell, and grow as terrible as storms.

I know you have a gentle, noble temper, A soul as even as a calm: pray, think us Those we profess, peace-makers, friends, and servants.

You wrong your virtues With these weak women's fears: a noble spirit, As yours was put into you, ever casts Such doubts, as false coin, from it.

The king loves you, Beware you lose it not: for us, if you please To trust us in your business, we are ready To use our utmost  studies in your service.

Do what ye will, my lords: and, pray, forgive me, If I have used myself unmannerly, You know I am a woman, lacking wit To make a seemly answer to such persons.

Pray, do my service to his majesty: He has my heart yet, and shall have my prayers While I shall have my life.

Come, reverend fathers, Bestow your counsels on me: she now begs, That little thought, when she set footing here, She should have bought her dignities so dear.

I am joyful To meet the least occasion that may give me Remembrance of my father-in-law, the duke, To be revenged on him.

If you cannot Bar his access to the king, never attempt Any thing on him, for he hath a witchcraft Over the king in's tongue.

O, fear him not, His spell in that is out: the king hath found Matter against him that for ever mars The honey of his language.

No, he's settled, Not to come off, in his displeasure.

I should be glad to hear such news as this Once every hour.

Believe it, this is true: In the divorce his contrary proceedings Are all unfolded wherein he appears As I would wish mine enemy.

Will this work? The king in this perceives him, how he coasts And hedges his own way.

But in this point All his tricks founder, and he brings his physic After his patient's death: the king already Hath married the fair lady.

Would he had! May you be happy in your wish, my lord For, I profess, you have it.

Now, all my joy Trace the conjunction! My amen to't! All men's! There's order given for her coronation: Marry, this is yet but young, and may be left To some ears unrecounted.

But, my lords, She is a gallant creature, and complete In mind and feature: I persuade me, from her Will fall some blessing to this land, which shall In it be memorised.

But, will the king Digest this letter of the cardinal's? The Lord forbid! Marry, amen! No, no, There be moe wasps that buzz about his nose Will make this sting the sooner.

Cardinal Campeius Is stol'n away to Rome, hath ta'en no leave, Has left the cause o' the king unhandled, and Is posted, as the agent of our cardinal, To second all his plot.

Katharine no more Shall be call'd queen, but princess dowager And widow to Prince Arthur.

This same Cranmer's A worthy fellow, and hath ta'en much pain In the king's business.

He has, and we shall see him For it an archbishop.

Gave't you the king? To his own hand, in's bedchamber.

Look'd he o' the inside of the paper? He did unseal them: and the first he view'd, He did it with a serious mind, a heed Was in his countenance.

Is he ready To come abroad? I think, by this he is.

It shall be to the Duchess of Alencon, The French king's sister: he shall marry her.

Anne Bullen! No, I'll no Anne Bullens for him: There's more in't than fair visage.

May be, he hears the king Does whet his anger to him.

Sharp enough, Lord, for thy justice! a knight's daughter, To be her mistress' mistress! the queen's queen! This candle burns not clear: 'tis I must snuff it, Then out it goes.

What though I know her virtuous And well deserving? yet I know her for A spleeny Lutheran, and not wholesome to Our cause, that she should lie i' the bosom of Our hard-ruled king.

Again, there is sprung up An heretic, an arch one, Cranmer, one Hath crawl'd into the favour of the king, And is his oracle.

It's heaven's will: Some spirit put this paper in the packet, To bless your eye withal.

And ever may your highness yoke together, As I will lend you cause, my doing well With my well saying! 'Tis well said again, And 'tis a kind of good deed to say well: And yet words are no deeds.

My father loved you: His said he did, and with his deed did crown His word upon you.

Since I had my office, I have kept you next my heart, have not alone Employ'd you where high profits might come home, But pared my present havings, to bestow My bounties upon you.

Have I not made you, The prime man of the state? I pray you, tell me, If what I now pronounce you have found true: And, if you may confess it, say withal, If you are bound to us or no.

Fairly answer'd, A loyal and obedient subject is Therein illustrated: the honour of it Does pay the act of it, as, i' the contrary, The foulness is the punishment.

'Tis nobly spoken: Take notice, lords, he has a loyal breast, For you have seen him open't.

Read o'er this, Giving him papers And after, this: and then to breakfast with What appetite you have.

I must read this paper, I fear, the story of his anger.

'Tis so, This paper has undone me: 'tis the account Of all that world of wealth I have drawn together For mine own ends, indeed, to gain the popedom, And fee my friends in Rome.

What's this? 'To the Pope!' The letter, as I live, with all the business I writ to's holiness.

Where's your commission, lords? words cannot carry Authority so weighty.

Who dare cross 'em, Bearing the king's will from his mouth expressly? Till I find more than will or words to do it, I mean your malice, know, officious lords, I dare and must deny it.

Proud lord, thou liest: Within these forty hours Surrey durst better Have burnt that tongue than said so.

This, and all else This talking lord can lay upon my credit, I answer is most false.

The duke by law Found his deserts: how innocent I was From any private malice in his end, His noble jury and foul cause can witness.

By my soul, Your long coat, priest, protects you, thou shouldst feel My sword i' the life-blood of thee else.

I'll startle you Worse than the scaring bell, when the brown wench Lay kissing in your arms, lord cardinal.

How much, methinks, I could despise this man, But that I am bound in charity against it! Those articles, my lord, are in the king's hand: But, thus much, they are foul ones.

So much fairer And spotless shall mine innocence arise, When the king knows my truth.

This cannot save you: I thank my memory, I yet remember Some of these articles, and out they shall.

Now, if you can blush and cry 'guilty,' cardinal, You'll show a little honesty.

Speak on, sir, I dare your worst objections: if I blush, It is to see a nobleman want manners.

Have at you! First, that, without the king's assent or knowledge, You wrought to be a legate, by which power You maim'd the jurisdiction of all bishops.

Then, that in all you writ to Rome, or else To foreign princes, 'Ego et Rex meus' Was still inscribed, in which you brought the king To be your servant.

Then that, without the knowledge Either of king or council, when you went Ambassador to the emperor, you made bold To carry into Flanders the great seal.

Item, you sent a large commission To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude, Without the king's will or the state's allowance, A league between his highness and Ferrara.

That, out of mere ambition, you have caused Your holy hat to be stamp'd on the king's coin.

Many more there are, Which, since they are of you, and odious, I will not taint my mouth with.

O my lord, Press not a falling man too far! 'tis virtue: His faults lie open to the laws, let them, Not you, correct him.

My heart weeps to see him So little of his great self.

This is my charge. And so we'll leave you to your meditations How to live better.

For your stubborn answer About the giving back the great seal to us, The king shall know it, and, no doubt, shall thank you.

Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye: I feel my heart new open'd.

Why, how now, Cromwell! I have no power to speak, sir.

What, amazed At my misfortunes? can thy spirit wonder A great man should decline? Nay, an you weep, I am fall'n indeed.

How does your grace? Why, well, Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell.

I know myself now, and I feel within me A peace above all earthly dignities, A still and quiet conscience.

I hope I have: I am able now, methinks, Out of a fortitude of soul I feel, To endure more miseries and greater far Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer.

What news abroad? The heaviest and the worst Is your displeasure with the king.

God bless him! The next is, that Sir Thomas More is chosen Lord chancellor in your place.

Last, that the Lady Anne, Whom the king hath in secrecy long married, This day was view'd in open as his queen, Going to chapel, and the voice is now Only about her coronation.

O Cromwell, The king has gone beyond me: all my glories In that one woman I have lost for ever: No sun shall ever usher forth mine honours, Or gild again the noble troops that waited Upon my smiles.

O my lord, Must I, then, leave you? must I needs forego So good, so noble and so true a master? Bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron, With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord.

The king shall have my service: but my prayers For ever and for ever shall be yours.

Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear In all my miseries, but thou hast forced me, Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.

Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace, To silence envious tongues.

O Cromwell, Cromwell! Had I but served my God with half the zeal I served my king, he would not in mine age Have left me naked to mine enemies.

Farewell The hopes of court! my hopes in heaven do dwell.

You come to take your stand here, and behold The Lady Anne pass from her coronation? 'Tis all my business.

At our last encounter, The Duke of Buckingham came from his trial.

'Tis very true: but that time offer'd sorrow, This, general joy.

'Tis well: the citizens, I am sure, have shown at full their royal minds-- As, let 'em have their rights, they are ever forward-- In celebration of this day with shows, Pageants and sights of honour.

Never greater, Nor, I'll assure you, better taken, sir.

May I be bold to ask at what that contains, That paper in your hand? Yes, 'tis the list Of those that claim their offices this day By custom of the coronation.

The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims To be high-steward, next, the Duke of Norfolk, He to be earl marshal: you may read the rest.

I thank you, sir: had I not known those customs, I should have been beholding to your paper.

But, I beseech you, what's become of Katharine, The princess dowager? how goes her business? That I can tell you too.

Alas, good lady! The trumpets sound: stand close, the queen is coming.

Lord Chancellor, with the purse and mace before him.

Mayor of London, bearing the mace. Then Garter, in his coat of arms, and on his head a gilt copper crown.

Marquess Dorset, bearing a sceptre of gold, on his head a demi-coronal of gold.

With him, SURREY, bearing the rod of silver with the dove, crowned with an earl's coronet.

SUFFOLK, in his robe of estate, his coronet on his head, bearing a long white wand, as high-steward.

With him, NORFOLK, with the rod of marshalship, a coronet on his head.

A canopy borne by four of the Cinque-ports, under it, QUEEN ANNE in her robe, in her hair richly adorned with pearl, crowned.

The old Duchess of Norfolk, in a coronal of gold, wrought with flowers, bearing QUEEN ANNE's train.

Certain Ladies or Countesses, with plain circlets of gold without flowers.

They pass over the stage in order and state A royal train, believe me.

These I know: Who's that that bears the sceptre? Marquess Dorset: And that the Earl of Surrey, with the rod.

That should be The Duke of Suffolk? 'Tis the same: high-steward.

And that my Lord of Norfolk? Heaven bless thee! Looking on QUEEN ANNE Thou hast the sweetest face I ever look'd on.

Sir, as I have a soul, she is an angel, Our king has all the Indies in his arms, And more and richer, when he strains that lady: I cannot blame his conscience.

They that bear The cloth of honour over her, are four barons Of the Cinque-ports.

I take it, she that carries up the train Is that old noble lady, Duchess of Norfolk.

These are stars indeed, And sometimes falling ones.

God save you, sir! where have you been broiling? Among the crowd i' the Abbey, where a finger Could not be wedged in more: I am stifled With the mere rankness of their joy.

Great-bellied women, That had not half a week to go, like rams In the old time of war, would shake the press, And make 'em reel before 'em.

No man living Could say 'This is my wife' there, all were woven So strangely in one piece.

But, what follow'd? At length her grace rose, and with modest paces Came to the altar, where she kneel'd, and saint-like Cast her fair eyes to heaven and pray'd devoutly.

So she parted, And with the same full state paced back again To York-place, where the feast is held.

You must no more call it York-place, that's past, For, since the cardinal fell, that title's lost: 'Tis now the king's, and call'd Whitehall.

I know it, But 'tis so lately alter'd, that the old name Is fresh about me.

What two reverend bishops Were those that went on each side of the queen? Stokesly and Gardiner, the one of Winchester, Newly preferr'd from the king's secretary, The other, London.

He of Winchester Is held no great good lover of the archbishop's, The virtuous Cranmer.

All the land knows that: However, yet there is no great breach, when it comes, Cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from him.

Who may that be, I pray you? Thomas Cromwell, A man in much esteem with the king, and truly A worthy friend.

The king has made him master O' the jewel house, And one, already, of the privy council.

Come, gentlemen, ye shall go my way, which Is to the court, and there ye shall be my guests: Something I can command.

How does your grace? O Griffith, sick to death! My legs, like loaden branches, bow to the earth, Willing to leave their burthen.

Reach a chair: So, now, methinks, I feel a little ease.

Didst thou not tell me, Griffith, as thou led'st me, That the great child of honour, Cardinal Wolsey, Was dead? Yes, madam, but I think your grace, Out of the pain you suffer'd, gave no ear to't.

Prithee, good Griffith, tell me how he died: If well, he stepp'd before me, happily For my example.

So may he rest, his faults lie gently on him! Yet thus far, Griffith, give me leave to speak him, And yet with charity.

Noble madam, Men's evil manners live in brass, their virtues We write in water.

May it please your highness To hear me speak his good now? Yes, good Griffith, I were malicious else.

This cardinal, Though from an humble stock, undoubtedly Was fashion'd to much honour from his cradle.

He was a scholar, and a ripe and good one, Exceeding wise, fair-spoken, and persuading: Lofty and sour to them that loved him not, But to those men that sought him sweet as summer.

After my death I wish no other herald, No other speaker of my living actions, To keep mine honour from corruption, But such an honest chronicler as Griffith.

Good Griffith, Cause the musicians play me that sad note I named my knell, whilst I sit meditating On that celestial harmony I go to.

Sad and solemn music She is asleep: good wench, let's sit down quiet, For fear we wake her: softly, gentle Patience.

It is not you I call for: Saw ye none enter since I slept? None, madam.

I am most joyful, madam, such good dreams Possess your fancy.

Bid the music leave, They are harsh and heavy to me.

Music ceases Do you note How much her grace is alter'd on the sudden? How long her face is drawn? how pale she looks, And of an earthy cold? Mark her eyes! She is going, wench: pray, pray.

I humbly do entreat your highness' pardon, My haste made me unmannerly.

There is staying A gentleman, sent from the king, to see you.

Admit him entrance, Griffith: but this fellow Let me ne'er see again.

Re-enter GRIFFITH, with CAPUCIUS If my sight fail not, You should be lord ambassador from the emperor, My royal nephew, and your name Capucius.

O, my lord, The times and titles now are alter'd strangely With me since first you knew me.

O my good lord, that comfort comes too late, 'Tis like a pardon after execution: That gentle physic, given in time, had cured me, But now I am past an comforts here, but prayers.

So may he ever do! and ever flourish, When I shal l dwell with worms, and my poor name Banish'd the kingdom! Patience, is that letter, I caused you write, yet sent away? No, madam.

Giving it to KATHARINE Sir, I most humbly pray you to deliver This to my lord the king.

By heaven, I will, Or let me lose the fashion of a man! I thank you, honest lord.

Remember me In all humility unto his highness: Say his long trouble now is passing Out of this world, tell him, in death I bless'd him, For so I will.

Griffith, farewell. Nay, Patience, You must not leave me yet: I must to bed, Call in more women.

These should be hours for necessities, Not for delights, times to repair our nature With comforting repose, and not for us To waste these times.

Good hour of night, Sir Thomas! Whither so late? Came you from the king, my lord I did, Sir Thomas: and left him at primero With the Duke of Suffolk.

My lord, I love you, And durst commend a secret to your ear Much weightier than this work.

The queen's in labour, They say, in great extremity, and fear'd She'll with the labour end.

The fruit she goes with I pray for heartily, that it may find Good time, and live: but for the stock, Sir Thomas, I wish it grubb'd up now.

Methinks I could Cry the amen, and yet my conscience says She's a good creature, and, sweet lady, does Deserve our better wishes.

Now, sir, you speak of two The most remark'd i' the kingdom.

As for Cromwell, Beside that of the jewel house, is made master O' the rolls, and the king's secretary, further, sir, Stands in the gap and trade of moe preferments, With which the time will load him.

He's a rank weed, Sir Thomas, And we must root him out.

From your affairs I hinder you too long: good night, Sir Thomas.

Charles, I will play no more tonight, My mind's not on't, you are too hard for me.

But little, Charles, Nor shall not, when my fancy's on my play.

What say'st thou, ha? To pray for her? what, is she crying out? So said her woman, and that her sufferance made Almost each pang a death.

Leave me alone, For I must think of that which company Would not be friendly to.

I wish your highness A quiet night, and my good mistress will Remember in my prayers.

Well, sir, what follows? Sir, I have brought my lord the archbishop, As you commanded me.

'Tis true: where is he, Denny? He attends your highness' pleasure.

Be gone. What! I am fearful: wherefore frowns he thus? 'Tis his aspect of terror.

All's not well. How now, my lord! you desire to know Wherefore I sent for you.

Pray you, arise, My good and gracious Lord of Canterbury.

Come, you and I must walk a turn together, I have news to tell you: come, come, give me your hand.

Stand up, good Canterbury: Thy truth and thy integrity is rooted In us, thy friend: give me thy hand, stand up: Prithee, let's walk.

Most dread liege, The good I stand on is my truth and honesty: If they shall fail, I, with mine enemies, Will triumph o'er my person, which I weigh not, Being of those virtues vacant.

You are potently opposed, and with a malice Of as great size.

God and your majesty Protect mine innocence, or I fall into The trap is laid for me! Be of good cheer, They shall no more prevail than we give way to.

Look, the good man weeps! He's honest, on mine honour.

God's blest mother! I swear he is true--hearted, and a soul None better in my kingdom.

I'll not come back, the tidings that I bring Will make my boldness manners.

Now, good angels Fly o'er thy royal head, and shade thy person Under their blessed wings! Now, by thy looks I guess thy message.

Ay, ay, my liege, And of a lovely boy: the God of heaven Both now and ever bless her! 'tis a girl, Promises boys hereafter.

Sir, your queen Desires your visitation, and to be Acquainted with this stranger 'tis as like you As cherry is to cherry.

I'll to the queen. An hundred marks! By this light, I'll ha' more.

Said I for this, the girl was like to him? I will have more, or else unsay't, and now, While it is hot, I'll put it to the issue.

I hope I am not too late, and yet the gentleman, That was sent to me from the council, pray'd me To make great haste.

All fast? what means this? Ho! Who waits there? Sure, you know me? Yes, my lord, But yet I cannot help you.

I came this way so happily: the king Shall understand it presently.

But their pleasures Must be fulfill'd, and I attend with patience.

I'll show your grace the strangest sight-- What's that, Butts? I think your highness saw this many a day.

Body o' me, where is it? There, my lord: The high promotion of his grace of Canterbury, Who holds his state at door, 'mongst pursuivants, Pages, and footboys.

Ha! 'tis he, indeed: Is this the honour they do one another? 'Tis well there's one above 'em yet.

By holy Mary, Butts, there's knavery: Let 'em alone, and draw the curtain close: We shall hear more anon.

Speak to the business, master-secretary: Why are we met in council? Please your honours, The chief cause concerns his grace of Canterbury.

Has he had knowledge of it? Who waits there? Without, my noble lords? My lord archbishop, And has done half an hour, to know your pleasures.

Pray heaven, the king may never find a heart With less allegiance in it! Men that make Envy and crooked malice nourishment Dare bite the best.

I do beseech your lordships, That, in this case of justice, my accusers, Be what they will, may stand forth face to face, And freely urge against me.

Nay, my lord, That cannot be: you are a counsellor, And, by that virtue, no man dare accuse you.

My lord, because we have business of more moment, We will be short with you.

That I shall clear myself, Lay all the weight ye can upon my patience, I make as little doubt, as you do conscience In doing daily wrongs.

I could say more, But reverence to your calling makes me modest.

My lord, my lord, you are a sectary, That's the plain truth: your painted gloss discovers, To men that understand you, words and weakness.

My Lord of Winchester, you are a little, By your good favour, too sharp, men so noble, However faulty, yet should find respect For what they have been: 'tis a cruelty To load a falling man.

Good master secretary, I cry your honour mercy, you may, worst Of all this table, say so.

Why, my lord? Do not I know you for a favourer Of this new sect? ye are not sound.

Would you were half so honest! Men's prayers then would seek you, not their fears.

Is there no other way of mercy, But I must needs to the Tower, my lords? What other Would you expect? you are strangely troublesome.

For me? Must I go like a traitor thither? Receive him, And see him safe i' the Tower.

Look there, my lords, By virtue of that ring, I take my cause Out of the gripes of cruel men, and give it To a most noble judge, the king my master.

'Tis the right ring, by heaven: I told ye all, When ye first put this dangerous stone a-rolling, 'Twould fall upon ourselves.

You were ever good at sudden commendations, Bishop of Winchester.

But know, I come not To hear such flattery now, and in my presence, They are too thin and bare to hide offences.

To me you cannot reach, you play the spaniel, And think with wagging of your tongue to win me, But, whatsoe'er thou takest me for, I'm sure Thou hast a cruel nature and a bloody.

Now let me see the proudest He, that dares most, but wag his finger at thee: By all that's holy, he had better starve Than but once think this place becomes thee not.

May it please your grace,-- No, sir, it does not please me.

I had thought I had had men of some understanding And wisdom of my council, but I find none.

Thus far, My most dread sovereign, may it like your grace To let my tongue excuse all.

What was purposed Concerning his imprisonment, was rather, If there be faith in men, meant for his trial, And fair purgation to the world, than malice, I'm sure, in me.

Well, well, my lords, respect him, Take him, and use him well, he's worthy of it.

I will say thus much for him, if a prince May be beholding to a subject, I Am, for his love and service, so to him.

And let heaven Witness, how dear I hold this confirmation.

Good man, those joyful tears show thy true heart: The common voice, I see, is verified Of thee, which says thus, 'Do my Lord of Canterbury A shrewd turn, and he is your friend for ever.

Come, lords, we trifle time away, I long To have this young one made a Christian.

As I have made ye one, lords, one remain, So I grow stronger, you more honour gain.

Enter Porter and his Man You'll leave your noise anon, ye rascals: do you take the court for Paris-garden? ye rude slaves, leave your gaping.

Belong to the gallows, and be hanged, ye rogue! is this a place to roar in? Fetch me a dozen crab-tree staves, and strong ones: these are but switches to 'em.

How got they in, and be hang'd? Alas, I know not, how gets the tide in? As much as one sound cudgel of four foot-- You see the poor remainder--could distribute, I made no spare, sir.

There was a haberdasher's wife of small wit near him, that railed upon me till her pinked porringer fell off her head, for kindling such a combustion in the state.

I missed the meteor once, and hit that woman, who cried out 'Clubs!' when I might see from far some forty truncheoners draw to her succor, which were the hope o' the Strand, where she was quartered.

These are the youths that thunder at a playhouse, and fight for bitten apples, that no audience, but the tribulation of Tower-hill, or the limbs of Limehouse, their dear brothers, are able to endure.

I have some of 'em in Limbo Patrum, and there they are like to dance these three days, besides the running banquet of two beadles that is to come.

An't please your honour, We are but men, and what so many may do, Not being torn a-pieces, we have done: An army cannot rule 'em.

You great fellow, Stand close up, or I'll make your head ache.

You i' the camlet, get up o' the rail, I'll peck you o'er the pales else.

Heaven, from thy endless goodness, send prosperous life, long, and ever happy, to the high and mighty princess of England, Elizabeth! Flourish.

KING HENRY VIII kisses the child With this kiss take my blessing: God protect thee! Into whose hand I give thy life.

My noble gossips, ye have been too prodigal: I thank ye heartily, so shall this lady, When she has so much English.

Let me speak, sir, For heaven now bids me, and the words I utter Let none think flattery, for they'll find 'em truth.

She shall be, to the happiness of England, An aged princess, many days shall see her, And yet no day without a deed to crown it.

Would I had known no more! but she must die, She must, the saints must have her, yet a virgin, A most unspotted lily shall she pass To the ground, and all the world shall mourn her.

To you, my good lord mayor, And your good brethren, I am much beholding, I have received much honour by your presence, And ye shall find me thankful.

Lead the way, lords: Ye must all see the queen, and she must thank ye, She will be sick else.

This day, no man think Has business at his house, for all shall stay: This little one shall make it holiday.

Now, say, Chatillon, what would France with us? Thus, after greeting, speaks the King of France In my behavior to the majesty, The borrow'd majesty, of England here.

A strange beginning: 'borrow'd majesty!' Silence, good mother, hear the embassy.

What follows if we disallow of this? The proud control of fierce and bloody war, To enforce these rights so forcibly withheld.

Here have we war for war and blood for blood, Controlment for controlment: so answer France.

Then take my king's defiance from my mouth, The farthest limit of my embassy.

An honourable conduct let him have: Pembroke, look to 't.

Your strong possession much more than your right, Or else it must go wrong with you and me: So much my conscience whispers in your ear, Which none but heaven and you and I shall hear.

My liege, here is the strangest controversy Come from country to be judged by you, That e'er I heard: shall I produce the men? Let them approach.

Our abbeys and our priories shall pay This expedition's charge.

What art thou? The son and heir to that same Faulconbridge.

Is that the elder, and art thou the heir? You came not of one mother then, it seems.

Out on thee, rude man! thou dost shame thy mother And wound her honour with this diffidence.

Why, being younger born, Doth he lay claim to thine inheritance? I know not why, except to get the land.

Do you not read some tokens of my son In the large composition of this man? Mine eye hath well examined his parts And finds them perfect Richard.

Sirrah, speak, What doth move you to claim your brother's land? Because he hath a half-face, like my father.

And once dispatch'd him in an embassy To Germany, there with the emperor To treat of high affairs touching that time.

Then, good my liege, let me have what is mine, My father's land, as was my father's will.

Sirrah, your brother is legitimate, Your father's wife did after wedlock bear him, And if she did play false, the fault was hers, Which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands That marry wives.

Shall then my father's will be of no force To dispossess that child which is not his? Of no more force to dispossess me, sir, Than was his will to get me, as I think.

I like thee well: wilt thou forsake thy fortune, Bequeath thy land to him and follow me? I am a soldier and now bound to France.

Your face hath got five hundred pound a year, Yet sell your face for five pence and 'tis dear.

What is thy name? Philip, my liege, so is my name begun, Philip, good old sir Robert's wife's eldest son.

From henceforth bear his name whose form thou bear'st: Kneel thou down Philip, but rise more great, Arise sir Richard and Plantagenet.

Brother by the mother's side, give me your hand: My father gave me honour, yours gave land.

Now blessed by the hour, by night or day, When I was got, sir Robert was away! The very spirit of Plantagenet! I am thy grandam, Richard, call me so.

Go, Faulconbridge: now hast thou thy desire, A landless knight makes thee a landed squire.

Come, madam, and come, Richard, we must speed For France, for France, for it is more than need.

Brother, adieu: good fortune come to thee! For thou wast got i' the way of honesty.

A foot of honour better than I was, But many a many foot of land the worse.

But who comes in such haste in riding-robes? What woman-post is this? hath she no husband That will take pains to blow a horn before her? O me! it is my mother.

James Gurney, wilt thou give us leave awhile? Good leave, good Philip.

Philip! sparrow: James, There's toys abroad: anon I'll tell thee more.

Hast thou conspired with thy brother too, That for thine own gain shouldst defend mine honour? What means this scorn, thou most untoward knave? Knight, knight, good mother, Basilisco-like.

Now, by this light, were I to get again, Madam, I would not wish a better father.

He that perforce robs lions of their hearts May easily win a woman's.

Ay, my mother, With all my heart I thank thee for my father! Who lives and dares but say thou didst not well When I was got, I'll send his soul to hell.

Come, lady, I will show thee to my kin, And they shall say, when Richard me begot, If thou hadst said him nay, it had been sin: Who says it was, he lies, I say 'twas not.

Well then, to work: our cannon shall be bent Against the brows of this resisting town.

A wonder, lady! lo, upon thy wish, Our messenger Chatillon is arrived! What England says, say briefly, gentle lord, We coldly pause for thee, Chatillon, speak.

Then turn your forces from this paltry siege And stir them up against a mightier task.

Drum beats The interruption of their churlish drums Cuts off more circumstance: they are at hand, To parley or to fight, therefore prepare.

How much unlook'd for is this expedition! By how much unexpected, by so much We must awake endavour for defence, For courage mounteth with occasion: Let them be welcome then: we are prepared.

Peace be to England, if that war return From France to England, there to live in peace.

England we love, and for that England's sake With burden of our armour here we sweat.

Who is it thou dost call usurper, France? Let me make answer, thy usurping son.

My boy a bastard! By my soul, I think His father never was so true begot: It cannot be, an if thou wert his mother.

There's a good mother, boy, that blots thy father.

There's a good grandam, boy, that would blot thee.

What craker is this same that deafs our ears With this abundance of superfluous breath? Lewis, determine what we shall do straight.

Arthur of Bretagne, yield thee to my hand, And out of my dear love I'll give thee more Than e'er the coward hand of France can win: Submit thee, boy.

Do, child, go to it grandam, child: Give grandam kingdom, and it grandam will Give it a plum, a cherry, and a fig: There's a good grandam.

Good my mother, peace! I would that I were low laid in my grave: I am not worth this coil that's made for me.

Ay, who doubts that? a will! a wicked will: A woman's will, a canker'd grandam's will! Peace, lady! pause, or be more temperate: It ill beseems this presence to cry aim To these ill-tuned repetitions.

Some trumpet summon hither to the walls These men of Angiers: let us hear them speak Whose title they admit, Arthur's or John's.

Enter certain Citizens upon the walls Who is it that hath warn'd us to the walls? 'Tis France, for England.

You men of Angiers, and my loving subjects-- You loving men of Angiers, Arthur's subjects, Our trumpet call'd you to this gentle parle-- For our advantage, therefore hear us first.

That can we not, but he that proves the king, To him will we prove loyal: till that time Have we ramm'd up our gates against the world.

Doth not the crown of England prove the king? And if not that, I bring you witnesses, Twice fifteen thousand hearts of England's breed,-- Bastards, and else.

As many and as well-born bloods as those,-- Some bastards too.

Till you compound whose right is worthiest, We for the worthiest hold the right from both.

Up higher to the plain, where we'll set forth In best appointment all our regiments.

It shall be so, and at the other hill Command the rest to stand.

One must prove greatest: while they weigh so even, We hold our town for neither, yet for both.

England, thou hast not saved one drop of blood, In this hot trial, more than we of France, Rather, lost more.

In us, that are our own great deputy And bear possession of our person here, Lord of our presence, Angiers, and of you.

By heaven, these scroyles of Angiers flout you, kings, And stand securely on their battlements, As in a theatre, whence they gape and point At your industrious scenes and acts of death.

How like you this wild counsel, mighty states? Smacks it not something of the policy? Now, by the sky that hangs above our heads, I like it well.

Say, where will you assault? We from the west will send destruction Into this city's bosom.

Our thunder from the south Shall rain their drift of bullets on this town.

O prudent discipline! From north to south: Austria and France shoot in each other's mouth: I'll stir them to it.

What say these young ones? What say you my niece? That she is bound in honour still to do What you in wisdom still vouchsafe to say.

Speak then, prince Dauphin, can you love this lady? Nay, ask me if I can refrain from love, For I do love her most unfeignedly.

Then do I give Volquessen, Touraine, Maine, Poictiers and Anjou, these five provinces, With her to thee, and this addition more, Full thirty thousand marks of English coin.

Philip of France, if thou be pleased withal, Command thy son and daughter to join hands.

It likes us well, young princes, close your hands.

And your lips too, for I am well assured That I did so when I was first assured.

Now, citizens of Angiers, ope your gates, Let in that amity which you have made, For at Saint Mary's chapel presently The rites of marriage shall be solemnized.

Is not the Lady Constance in this troop? I know she is not, for this match made up Her presence would have interrupted much: Where is she and her son? tell me, who knows.

And, by my faith, this league that we have made Will give her sadness very little cure.

Brother of England, how may we content This widow lady? In her right we came, Which we, God knows, have turn'd another way, To our own vantage.

We will heal up all, For we'll create young Arthur Duke of Bretagne And Earl of Richmond, and this rich fair town We make him lord of.

Go we, as well as haste will suffer us, To this unlook'd for, unprepared pomp.

Well, whiles I am a beggar, I will rail And say there is no sin but to be rich, And being rich, my virtue then shall be To say there is no vice but beggary.

Since kings break faith upon commodity, Gain, be my lord, for I will worship thee.

As true as I believe you think them false That give you cause to prove my saying true.

Lewis marry Blanch! O boy, then where art thou? France friend with England, what becomes of me? Fellow, be gone: I cannot brook thy sight: This news hath made thee a most ugly man.

What other harm have I, good lady, done, But spoke the harm that is by others done? Which harm within itself so heinous is As it makes harmful all that speak of it.

But thou art fair, and at thy birth, dear boy, Nature and Fortune join'd to make thee great: Of Nature's gifts thou mayst with lilies boast, And with the half-blown rose.

Pardon me, madam, I may not go without you to the kings.

Thou mayst, thou shalt, I will not go with thee: I will instruct my sorrows to be proud, For grief is proud and makes his owner stoop.

O, that a man should speak those words to me! And hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.

Hail, you anointed deputies of heaven! To thee, King John, my holy errand is.

What earthy name to interrogatories Can task the free breath of a sacred king? Thou canst not, cardinal, devise a name So slight, unworthy and ridiculous, To charge me to an answer, as the pope.

Then, by the lawful power that I have, Thou shalt stand cursed and excommunicate.

O, lawful let it be That I have room with Rome to curse awhile! Good father cardinal, cry thou amen To my keen curses, for without my wrong There is no tongue hath power to curse him right.

Look'st thou pale, France? do not let go thy hand.

Look to that, devil, lest that France repent, And by disjoining hands, hell lose a soul.

Well, ruffian, I must pocket up these wrongs, Because-- Your breeches best may carry them.

O Lewis, stand fast! the devil tempts thee here In likeness of a new untrimmed bride.

The Lady Constance speaks not from her faith, But from her need.

O, if thou grant my need, Which only lives but by the death of faith, That need must needs infer this principle, That faith would live again by death of need.

O then, tread down my need, and faith mounts up, Keep my need up, and faith is trodden down! The king is moved, and answers not to this.

O, be removed from him, and answer well! Do so, King Philip, hang no more in doubt.

What canst thou say but will perplex thee more, If thou stand excommunicate and cursed? Good reverend father, make my person yours, And tell me how you would bestow yourself.

All form is formless, order orderless, Save what is opposite to England's love.

Therefore to arms! be champion of our church, Or let the church, our mother, breathe her curse, A mother's curse, on her revolting son.

France, thou mayst hold a serpent by the tongue, A chafed lion by the mortal paw, A fasting tiger safer by the tooth, Than keep in peace that hand which thou dost hold.

So makest thou faith an enemy to faith, And like a civil war set'st oath to oath, Thy tongue against thy tongue.

But if not, then know The peril of our curses light on thee So heavy as thou shalt not shake them off, But in despair die under their black weight.

England, I will fall from thee. O fair return of banish'd majesty! O foul revolt of French inconstancy! France, thou shalt rue this hour within this hour.

Old Time the clock-setter, that bald sexton Time, Is it as he will? well then, France shall rue.

France, I am burn'd up with inflaming wrath, A rage whose heat hath this condition, That nothing can allay, nothing but blood, The blood, and dearest-valued blood, of France.

Thy rage sham burn thee up, and thou shalt turn To ashes, ere our blood shall quench that fire: Look to thyself, thou art in jeopardy.

Enter the BASTARD, with AUSTRIA'S head Now, by my life, this day grows wondrous hot, Some airy devil hovers in the sky And pours down mischief.

Philip, make up: My mother is assailed in our tent, And ta'en, I fear.

My lord, I rescued her, Her highness is in safety, fear you not: But on, my liege, for very little pains Will bring this labour to an happy end.

Enter KING JOHN,  QUEEN ELINOR, ARTHUR, the BASTARD, HUBERT, and Lords stay behind So strongly guarded.

To ARTHUR Cousin, look not sad: Thy grandam loves thee, and thy uncle will As dear be to thee as thy father was.

Bell, book, and candle shall not drive me back, When gold and silver becks me to come on.

Grandam, I will pray, If ever I remember to be holy, For your fair safety, so, I kiss your hand.

I had a thing to say, But I will fit it with some better time.

By heaven, Hubert, I am almost ashamed To say what good respect I have of thee.

Good friend, thou hast no cause to say so yet, But thou shalt have, and creep time ne'er so slow, Yet it shall come from me to do thee good.

So well, that what you bid me undertake, Though that my death were adjunct to my act, By heaven, I would do it.

And I'll keep him so, That he shall not offend your majesty.

Hubert, I love thee, Well, I'll not say what I intend for thee: Remember.

Madam, fare you well: I'll send those powers o'er to your majesty.

My blessing go with thee! For England, cousin, go: Hubert shall be your man, attend on you With all true duty.

On toward Calais, ho! So, by a roaring tempest on the flood, A whole armado of convicted sail Is scatter'd and disjoin'd from fellowship.

Look, who comes here! a grave unto a soul, Holding the eternal spirit against her will, In the vile prison of afflicted breath.

I will not keep this form upon my head, When there is such disorder in my wit.

O Lord! my boy, my Arthur, my fair son! My life, my joy, my food, my all the world! My widow-comfort, and my sorrows' cure! I fear some outrage, and I'll follow her.

No, no, when Fortune means to men most good, She looks upon them with a threatening eye.

'Tis strange to think how much King John hath lost In this which he accounts so clearly won: Are not you grieved that Arthur is his prisoner? As heartily as he is glad he hath him.

John hath seized Arthur, and it cannot be That, whiles warm life plays in that infant's veins, The misplaced John should entertain an hour, One minute, nay, one quiet breath of rest.

But what shall I gain by young Arthur's fall? You, in the right of Lady Blanch your wife, May then make all the claim that Arthur did.

How green you are and fresh in this old world! John lays you plots, the times conspire with you, For he that steeps his safety in true blood Shall find but bloody safety and untrue.

May be he will not touch young Arthur's life, But hold himself safe in his prisonment.

O noble Dauphin, Go with me to the king: 'tis wonderful What may be wrought out of their discontent, Now that their souls are topful of offence.

Strong reasons make strong actions: let us go: If you say ay, the king will not say no.

As little prince, having so great a title To be more prince, as may be.

Mercy on me! Methinks no body should be sad but I: Yet, I remember, when I was in France, Young gentlemen would be as sad as night, Only for wantonness.

He will awake my mercy which lies dead: Therefore I will be sudden and dispatch.

Are you sick, Hubert? you look pale to-day: In sooth, I would you were a little sick, That I might sit all night and watch with you: I warrant I love you more than you do me.

Showing a paper How now, foolish rheum! Turning dispiteous torture out of door! I must be brief, lest resolution drop Out at mine eyes in tender womanish tears.

Can you not read it? Is it not fair writ? Too fairly, Hubert, for so foul effect: Must you with hot irons burn out both mine eyes? Young boy, I must.

Nay, you may think my love was crafty love And call it cunning: do, an if you will: If heaven be pleased that you must use me ill, Why then you must.

Will you put out mine eyes? These eyes that never did nor never shall So much as frown on you.

I have sworn to do it, And with hot irons must I burn them out.

Are you more stubborn-hard than hammer'd iron? An if an angel should have come to me And told me Hubert should put out mine eyes, I would not have believed him,--no tongue but Hubert's.

Re-enter Executioners, with a cord, irons,  and c Do as I bid you do.

O, save me, Hubert, save me! my eyes are out Even with the fierce looks of these bloody men.

Alas, what need you be so boisterous-rough? I will not struggle, I will stand stone-still.

Alas, I then have chid away my friend! He hath a stern look, but a gentle heart: Let him come back, that his compassion may Give life to yours.

Though to no use but still to look on you! Lo, by my truth, the instrument is cold And would not harm me.

All things that you should use to do me wrong Deny their office: only you do lack That mercy which fierce fire and iron extends, Creatures of note for mercy-lacking uses.

Well, see to live, I will not touch thine eye For all the treasure that thine uncle owes: Yet am I sworn and I did purpose, boy, With this same very iron to burn them out.

O, now you look like Hubert! all this while You were disguised.

Silence, no more: go closely in with me: Much danger do I undergo for thee.

Here once again we sit, once again crown'd, And looked upon, I hope, with cheerful eyes.

But that your royal pleasure must be done, This act is as an ancient tale new told, And in the last repeating troublesome, Being urged at a time unseasonable.

Let it be so: I do commit his youth To your direction.

The colour of the king doth come and go Between his purpose and his conscience, Like heralds 'twixt two dreadful battles set: His passion is so ripe, it needs must break.

And when it breaks, I fear will issue thence The foul corruption of a sweet child's death.

We cannot hold mortality's strong hand: Good lords, although my will to give is living, The suit which you demand is gone and dead: He tells us Arthur is deceased to-night.

Indeed we heard how near his death he was Before the child himself felt he was sick: This must be answer'd either here or hence.

Stay yet, Lord Salisbury, I'll go with thee, And find the inheritance of this poor child, His little kingdom of a forced grave.

That blood which owed the breadth of all this isle, Three foot of it doth hold: bad world the while! This must not be thus borne: this will break out To all our sorrows, and ere long I doubt.

I repent: There is no sure foundation set on blood, No certain life achieved by others' death.

A fearful eye thou hast: where is that blood That I have seen inhabit in those cheeks? So foul a sky clears not without a storm: Pour down thy weather: how goes all in France? From France to England.

Never such a power For any foreign preparation Was levied in the body of a land.

The copy of your speed is learn'd by them, For when you should be told they do prepare, The tidings come that they are all arrived.

Now, what says the world To your proceedings? do not seek to stuff My head with more ill news, for it is full.

But if you be afeard to hear the worst, Then let the worst unheard fall on your bead.

Bear with me cousin, for I was amazed Under the tide: but now I breathe again Aloft the flood, and can give audience To any tongue, speak it of what it will.

How I have sped among the clergymen, The sums I have collected shall express.

Thou idle dreamer, wherefore didst thou so? Foreknowing that the truth will fall out so.

Hubert, away with him, imprison him, And on that day at noon whereon he says I shall yield up my crown, let him be hang'd.

Deliver him to safety, and return, For I must use thee.

Gentle kinsman, go, And thrust thyself into their companies: I have a way to win their loves again, Bring them before me.

O, let me have no subject enemies, When adverse foreigners affright my towns With dreadful pomp of stout invasion! Be Mercury, set feathers to thy heels, And fly like thought from them to me again.

Go after him, for he perhaps shall need Some messenger betwixt me and the peers, And be thou he.

My mother dead! Re-enter HUBERT My lord, they say five moons were seen to-night, Four fixed, and the fifth did whirl about The other four in wondrous motion.

Why seek'st thou to possess me with these fears? Why urgest thou so oft young Arthur's death? Thy hand hath murder'd him: I had a mighty cause To wish him dead, but thou hadst none to kill him.

Arm you against your other enemies, I'll make a peace between your soul and you.

Young Arthur is alive: this hand of mine Is yet a maiden and an innocent hand, Not painted with the crimson spots of blood.

O, answer not, but to my closet bring The angry lords with all expedient haste.

The wall is high, and yet will I leap down: Good ground, be pitiful and hurt me not! There's few or none do know me: if they did, This ship-boy's semblance hath disguised me quite.

If I get down, and do not break my limbs, I'll find a thousand shifts to get away: As good to die and go, as die and stay.

Who brought that letter from the cardinal? The Count Melun, a noble lord of France, Whose private with me of the Dauphin's love Is much more general than these lines import.

Or rather then set forward, for 'twill be Two long days' journey, lords, or ere we meet.

Once more to-day well met, distemper'd lords! The king by me requests your presence straight.

The king hath dispossess'd himself of us: We will not line his thin bestained cloak With our pure honours, nor attend the foot That leaves the print of blood where'er it walks.

Whate'er you think, good words, I think, were best.

But there is little reason in your grief, Therefore 'twere reason you had manners now.

What is he lies here? Seeing ARTHUR O death, made proud with pure and princely beauty! The earth had not a hole to hide this deed.

Murder, as hating what himself hath done, Doth lay it open to urge on revenge.

Or, when he doom'd this beauty to a grave, Found it too precious-princely for a grave.

It is a damned and a bloody work, The graceless action of a heavy hand, If that it be the work of any hand.

Lords, I am hot with haste in seeking you: Arthur doth live, the king hath sent for you.

Avaunt, thou hateful villain, get thee gone! I am no villain.

Must I rob the law? Drawing his sword Your sword is bright, sir, put it up again.

Out, dunghill! darest thou brave a nobleman? Not for my life: but yet I dare defend My innocent life against an emperor.

Do not prove me so, Yet I am none: whose tongue soe'er speaks false, Not truly speaks, who speaks not truly, lies.

Thou wert better gall the devil, Salisbury: If thou but frown on me, or stir thy foot, Or teach thy hasty spleen to do me shame, I'll strike thee dead.

Put up thy sword betime, Or I'll so maul you and your toasting-iron, That you shall think the devil is come from hell.

What wilt thou do, renowned Faulconbridge? Second a villain and a murderer? Lord Bigot, I am none.

Who kill'd this prince? 'Tis not an hour since I left him well: I honour'd him, I loved him, and will weep My date of life out for his sweet life's loss.

Trust not those cunning waters of his eyes, For villany is not without such rheum, And he, long traded in it, makes it seem Like rivers of remorse and innocency.

Away with me, all you whose souls abhor The uncleanly savours of a slaughter-house, For I am stifled with this smell of sin.

Away toward Bury, to the Dauphin there! There tell the king he may inquire us out.

Here's a good world! Knew you of this fair work? Beyond the infinite and boundless reach Of mercy, if thou didst this deed of death, Art thou damn'd, Hubert.

If I in act, consent, or sin of thought, Be guilty of the stealing that sweet breath Which was embounded in this beauteous clay, Let hell want pains enough to torture me.

I am amazed, methinks, and lose my way Among the thorns and dangers of this world.

Now happy he whose cloak and cincture can Hold out this tempest.

Bear away that child And follow me with speed: I'll to the king: A thousand businesses are brief in hand, And heaven itself doth frown upon the land.

Thus have I yielded up into your hand The circle of my glory.

Giving the crown Take again From this my hand, as holding of the pope Your sovereign greatness and authority.

Now keep your holy word: go meet the French, And from his holiness use all your power To stop their marches 'fore we are inflamed.

Our discontented counties do revolt, Our people quarrel with obedience, Swearing allegiance and the love of soul To stranger blood, to foreign royalty.

This inundation of mistemper'd humour Rests by you only to be qualified: Then pause not, for the present time's so sick, That present medicine must be minister'd, Or overthrow incurable ensues.

On this Ascension-day, remember well, Upon your oath of service to the pope, Go I to make the French lay down their arms.

Away, and glister like the god of war, When he intendeth to become the field: Show boldness and aspiring confidence.

The legate of the pope hath been with me, And I have made a happy peace with him, And he hath promised to dismiss the powers Led by the Dauphin.

Away, then, with good courage! yet, I know, Our party may well meet a prouder foe.

Come, come, for thou shalt thrust thy hand as deep Into the purse of rich prosperity As Lewis himself: so, nobles, shall you all, That knit your sinews to the strength of mine.

And even there, methinks, an angel spake: Look, where the holy legate comes apace, To give us warrant from the hand of heaven And on our actions set the name of right With holy breath.

Your grace shall pardon me, I will not back: I am too high-born to be propertied, To be a secondary at control, Or useful serving-man and instrument, To any sovereign state throughout the world.

The Dauphin is too wilful-opposite, And will not temporize with my entreaties, He flatly says he'll not lay down his arms.

By all the blood that ever fury breathed, The youth says well.

Now hear our English king, For thus his royalty doth speak in me.

There end thy brave, and turn thy face in peace, We grant thou canst outscold us: fare thee well, We hold our time too precious to be spent With such a brabbler.

Strike up the drums, and let the tongue of war Plead for our interest and our being here.

Enter KING JOHN and HUBERT How goes the day with us? O, tell me, Hubert.

Be of good comfort, for the great supply That was expected by the Dauphin here, Are wreck'd three nights ago on Goodwin Sands.

This news was brought to Richard but even now: The French fight coldly, and retire themselves.

Ay me! this tyrant fever burns me up, And will not let me welcome this good news.

Set on toward Swinstead: to my litter straight, Weakness possesseth me, and I am faint.

Up once again, put spirit in the French: If they miscarry, we miscarry too.

That misbegotten devil, Faulconbridge, In spite of spite, alone upholds the day.

Fly, noble English, you are bought and sold, Unthread the rude eye of rebellion And welcome home again discarded faith.

Commend me to one Hubert with your king: The love of him, and this respect besides, For that my grandsire was an Englishman, Awakes my conscience to confess all this.

My arm shall give thee help to bear thee hence, For I do see the cruel pangs of death Right in thine eye.

Away, my friends! New flight, And happy newness, that intends old right.

The sun of heaven methought was loath to set, But stay'd and made the western welkin blush, When English measure backward their own ground In faint retire.

Ah, foul shrewd news! beshrew thy very heart! I did not think to be so sad to-night As this hath made me.

Who was he that said King John did fly an hour or two before The stumbling night did part our weary powers? Whoever spoke it, it is true, my lord.

Well, keep good quarter and good care to-night: The day shall not be up so soon as I, To try the fair adventure of to-morrow.

Who's there? speak, ho! speak quickly, or I shoot.

Who art thou? Who thou wilt: and if thou please, Thou mayst befriend me so much as to think I come one way of the Plantagenets.

Unkind remembrance! thou and eyeless night Have done me shame: brave soldier, pardon me, That any accent breaking from thy tongue Should 'scape the true acquaintance of mine ear.

Come, come, sans compliment, what news abroad? Why, here walk I in the black brow of night, To find you out.

Brief, then, and what's the news? O, my sweet sir, news fitting to the night, Black, fearful, comfortless and horrible.

Show me the very wound of this ill news: I am no woman, I'll not swoon at it.

How did he take it? who did taste to him? A monk, I tell you, a resolved villain, Whose bowels suddenly burst out: the king Yet speaks and peradventure may recover.

Away before: conduct me to the king, I doubt he will be dead or ere I come.

His highness yet doth speak, and holds belief That, being brought into the open air, It would allay the burning quality Of that fell poison which assaileth him.

Doth he still rage? He is more patient Than when you left him, even now he sung.

O vanity of sickness! fierce extremes In their continuance will not feel themselves.

I am the cygnet to this pale faint swan, Who chants a doleful hymn to his own death, And from the organ-pipe of frailty sings His soul and body to their lasting rest.

Be of good comfort, prince, for you are born To set a form upon that indigest Which he hath left so shapeless and so rude.

Ay, marry, now my soul hath elbow-room, It would not out at windows nor at doors.

There is so hot a summer in my bosom, That all my bowels crumble up to dust: I am a scribbled form, drawn with a pen Upon a parchment, and against this fire Do I shrink up.

I do not ask you much, I beg cold comfort, and you are so strait And so ingrateful, you deny me that.

O that there were some virtue in my tears, That might relieve you! The salt in them is hot.

Within me is a hell, and there the poison Is as a fiend confined to tyrannize On unreprievable condemned blood.

KING JOHN dies You breathe these dead news in as dead an ear.

Straight let us seek, or straight we shall be sought, The Dauphin rages at our very heels.

He will the rather do it when he sees Ourselves well sinewed to our defence.

Let it be so: and you, my noble prince, With other princes that may best be spared, Shall wait upon your father's funeral.

At Worcester must his body be interr'd, For so he will'd it.

And the like tender of our love we make, To rest without a spot for evermore.

I have a kind soul that would give you thanks And knows not how to do it but with tears.

O, let us pay the time but needful woe, Since it hath been beforehand with our griefs.

This England never did, nor never shall, Lie at the proud foot of a conqueror, But when it first did help to wound itself.

Now these her princes are come home again, Come the three corners of the world in arms, And we shall shock them.

Nought shall make us rue, If England to itself do rest but true.

Where is thy leather apron and thy rule? What dost thou with thy best apparel on? You, sir, what trade are you? Truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, I am but, as you would say, a cobbler.

A trade, sir, that, I hope, I may use with a safe conscience, which is, indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.

What trade, thou knave? thou naughty knave, what trade? Nay, I beseech you, sir, be not out with me: yet, if you be out, sir, I can mend you.

What meanest thou by that? mend me, thou saucy fellow! Why, sir, cobble you.

Thou art a cobbler, art thou? Truly, sir, all that I live by is with the awl: I meddle with no tradesman's matters, nor women's matters, but with awl.

I am, indeed, sir, a surgeon to old shoes, when they are in great danger, I recover them.

As proper men as ever trod upon neat's leather have gone upon my handiwork.

But wherefore art not in thy shop today? Why dost thou lead these men about the streets? Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes, to get myself into more work.

But, indeed, sir, we make holiday, to see Caesar and to rejoice in his triumph.

See whether their basest metal be not moved, They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness.

Go you down that way towards the Capitol, This way will I disrobe the images, If you do find them deck'd with ceremonies.

May we do so? You know it is the feast of Lupercal.

It is no matter, let no images Be hung with Caesar's trophies.

I'll about, And drive away the vulgar from the streets: So do you too, where you perceive them thick.

These growing feathers pluck'd from Caesar's wing Will make him fly an ordinary pitch, Who else would soar above the view of men And keep us all in servile fearfulness.

Enter CAESAR, ANTONY, for the course,  CALPURNIA, PORTIA, DECIUS BRUTUS, CICERO, BRUTUS,  CASSIUS, and CASCA, a great crowd following, among them a Soothsayer Peace, ho! Caesar speaks.

Stand you directly in Antonius' way, When he doth run his course.

Antonius! Caesar, my lord? Forget not, in your speed, Antonius, To touch Calpurnia, for our elders say, The barren, touched in this holy chase, Shake off their sterile curse.

I shall remember: When Caesar says 'do this,' it is perform'd.

Ha! who calls? Bid every noise be still: peace yet again! Who is it in the press that calls on me? I hear a tongue, shriller than all the music, Cry 'Caesar!' Speak, Caesar is turn'd to hear.

What man is that? A soothsayer bids you beware the ides of March.

Exeunt all except BRUTUS and CASSIUS Will you go see the order of the course? Not I.

I am not gamesome: I do lack some part Of that quick spirit that is in Antony.

Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires, I'll leave you.

Brutus, I do observe you now of late: I have not from your eyes that gentleness And show of love as I was wont to have: You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand Over your friend that loves you.

Be not deceived: if I have veil'd my look, I turn the trouble of my countenance Merely upon myself.

Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion, By means whereof this breast of mine hath buried Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.

Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face? No, Cassius, for the eye sees not itself, But by reflection, by some other things.

'Tis just: And it is very much lamented, Brutus, That you have no such mirrors as will turn Your hidden worthiness into your eye, That you might see your shadow.

I have heard, Where many of the best respect in Rome, Except immortal Caesar, speaking of Brutus And groaning underneath this age's yoke, Have wish'd that noble Brutus had his eyes.

Flourish, and shout What means this shouting? I do fear, the people Choose Caesar for their king.

Ay, do you fear it? Then must I think you would not have it so.

I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus, As well as I do know your outward favour.

I cannot tell what you and other men Think of this life, but, for my single self, I had as lief not be as live to be In awe of such a thing as I myself.

And this man Is now become a god, and Cassius is A wretched creature and must bend his body, If Caesar carelessly but nod on him.

Ye gods, it doth amaze me A man of such a feeble temper should So get the start of the majestic world And bear the palm alone.

Flourish Another general shout! I do believe that these applauses are For some new honours that are heap'd on Caesar.

Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world Like a Colossus, and we petty men Walk under his huge legs and peep about To find ourselves dishonourable graves.

Men at some time are masters of their fates: The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, But in ourselves, that we are underlings.

O, you and I have heard our fathers say, There was a Brutus once that would have brook'd The eternal devil to keep his state in Rome As easily as a king.

What you have said I will consider, what you have to say I will with patience hear, and find a time Both meet to hear and answer such high things.

Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this: Brutus had rather be a villager Than to repute himself a son of Rome Under these hard conditions as this time Is like to lay upon us.

I am glad that my weak words Have struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus.

As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve, And he will, after his sour fashion, tell you What hath proceeded worthy note to-day.

Let me have men about me that are fat, Sleek-headed men and such as sleep o' nights: Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look, He thinks too much: such men are dangerous.

Fear him not, Caesar, he's not dangerous, He is a noble Roman and well given.

Would he were fatter! But I fear him not: Yet if my name were liable to fear, I do not know the man I should avoid So soon as that spare Cassius.

Such men as he be never at heart's ease Whiles they behold a greater than themselves, And therefore are they very dangerous.

I rather tell thee what is to be fear'd Than what I fear, for always I am Caesar.

Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf, And tell me truly what thou think'st of him.

Exeunt CAESAR and all his Train, but CASCA You pull'd me by the cloak, would you speak with me? Ay, Casca, tell us what hath chanced to-day, That Caesar looks so sad.

Why, you were with him, were you not? I should not then ask Casca what had chanced.

Why, there was a crown offered him: and being offered him, he put it by with the back of his hand, thus, and then the people fell a-shouting.

They shouted thrice: what was the last cry for? Why, for that too.

Was the crown offered him thrice? Ay, marry, was't, and he put it by thrice, every time gentler than other, and at every putting-by mine honest neighbours shouted.

I can as well be hanged as tell the manner of it: it was mere foolery, I did not mark it.

I saw Mark Antony offer him a crown,--yet 'twas not a crown neither, 'twas one of these coronets,--and, as I told you, he put it by once: but, for all that, to my thinking, he would fain have had it.

Then he offered it to him again, then he put it by again: but, to my thinking, he was very loath to lay his fingers off it.

But, soft, I pray you: what, did Caesar swound? He fell down in the market-place, and foamed at mouth, and was speechless.

No, Caesar hath it not, but you and I, And honest Casca, we have the falling sickness.

I know not what you mean by that, but, I am sure, Caesar fell down.

If the tag-rag people did not clap him and hiss him, according as he pleased and displeased them, as they use to do the players in the theatre, I am no true man.

What said he when he came unto himself? Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the common herd was glad he refused the crown, he plucked me ope his doublet and offered them his throat to cut.

An I had been a man of any occupation, if I would not have taken him at a word, I would I might go to hell among the rogues.

When he came to himself again, he said, If he had done or said any thing amiss, he desired their worships to think it was his infirmity.

And after that, he came, thus sad, away? Did Cicero say any thing? Ay, he spoke Greek.

To what effect? Nay, an I tell you that, Ill ne'er look you i' the face again: but those that understood him smiled at one another and shook their heads, but, for mine own part, it was Greek to me.

I could tell you more news too: Marullus and Flavius, for pulling scarfs off Caesar's images, are put to silence.

There was more foolery yet, if I could remember it.

Will you sup with me to-night, Casca? No, I am promised forth.

Will you dine with me to-morrow? Ay, if I be alive and your mind hold and your dinner worth the eating.

Farewell, both. What a blunt fellow is this grown to be! He was quick mettle when he went to school.

So is he now in execution Of any bold or noble enterprise, However he puts on this tardy form.

This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit, Which gives men stomach to digest his words With better appetite.

For this time I will leave you: To-morrow, if you please to speak with me, I will come home to you, or, if you will, Come home to me, and I will wait for you.

Either there is a civil strife in heaven, Or else the world, too saucy with the gods, Incenses them to send destruction.

And yesterday the bird of night did sit Even at noon-day upon the market-place, Hooting and shrieking.

When these prodigies Do so conjointly meet, let not men say 'These are their reasons, they are natural,' For, I believe, they are portentous things Unto the climate that they point upon.

Indeed, it is a strange-disposed time: But men may construe things after their fashion, Clean from the purpose of the things themselves.

Come Caesar to the Capitol to-morrow? He doth, for he did bid Antonius Send word to you he would be there to-morrow.

Good night then, Casca: this disturbed sky Is not to walk in.

Cassius, what night is this! A very pleasing night to honest men.

Who ever knew the heavens menace so? Those that have known the earth so full of faults.

But wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens? It is the part of men to fear and tremble, When the most mighty gods by tokens send Such dreadful heralds to astonish us.

You are dull, Casca, and those sparks of life That should be in a Roman you do want, Or else you use not.

Indeed, they say the senators tomorrow Mean to establish Caesar as a king, And he shall wear his crown by sea and land, In every place, save here in Italy.

If I know this, know all the world besides, That part of tyranny that I do bear I can shake off at pleasure.

Thunder still So can I: So every bondman in his own hand bears The power to cancel his captivity.

And why should Caesar be a tyrant then? Poor man! I know he would not be a wolf, But that he sees the Romans are but sheep: He were no lion, were not Romans hinds.

But I am arm'd, And dangers are to me indifferent.

You speak to Casca, and to such a man That is no fleering tell-tale.

Hold, my hand: Be factious for redress of all these griefs, And I will set this foot of mine as far As who goes farthest.

'Tis Cinna, I do know him by his gait, He is a friend.

Who's that? Metellus Cimber? No, it is Casca, one incorporate To our attempts.

What a fearful night is this! There's two or three of us have seen strange sights.

Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there? All but Metellus Cimber, and he's gone To seek you at your house.

Well, I will hie, And so bestow these papers as you bade me.

Come, Casca, you and I will yet ere day See Brutus at his house: three parts of him Is ours already, and the man entire Upon the next encounter yields him ours.

O, he sits high in all the people's hearts: And that which would appear offence in us, His countenance, like richest alchemy, Will change to virtue and to worthiness.

Him and his worth and our great need of him You have right well conceited.

Let us go, For it is after midnight, and ere day We will awake him and be sure of him.

What, Lucius, ho! I cannot, by the progress of the stars, Give guess how near to day.

Lucius, I say! I would it were my fault to sleep so soundly.

When, Lucius, when? awake, I say! what, Lucius! Call'd you, my lord? Get me a taper in my study, Lucius: When it is lighted, come and call me here.

It must be by his death: and for my part, I know no personal cause to spurn at him, But for the general.

He would be crown'd: How that might change his nature, there's the question.

It is the bright day that brings forth the adder, And that craves wary walking.

Crown him?--that,-- And then, I grant, we put a sting in him, That at his will he may do danger with.

The abuse of greatness is, when it disjoins Remorse from power: and, to speak truth of Caesar, I have not known when his affections sway'd More than his reason.

But 'tis a common proof, That lowliness is young ambition's ladder, Whereto the climber-upward turns his face, But when he once attains the upmost round.

He then unto the ladder turns his back, Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees By which he did ascend.

Re-enter LUCIUS The taper burneth in your closet, sir.

Searching the window for a flint, I found This paper, thus seal'd up, and, I am sure, It did not lie there when I went to bed.

Gives him the letter Get you to bed again, it is not day.

Is not to-morrow, boy, the ides of March? I know not, sir.

The exhalations whizzing in the air Give so much light that I may read by them.

Opens the letter and reads 'Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake, and see thyself.

Speak, strike, redress! Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake!' Such instigations have been often dropp'd Where I have took them up.

Thus must I piece it out: Shall Rome stand under one man's awe? What, Rome? My ancestors did from the streets of Rome The Tarquin drive, when he was call'd a king.

Go to the gate, somebody knocks. Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar, I have not slept.

Re-enter LUCIUS Sir, 'tis your brother Cassius at the door, Who doth desire to see you.

Do you know them? No, sir, their hats are pluck'd about their ears, And half their faces buried in their cloaks, That by no means I may discover them By any mark of favour.

I think we are too bold upon your rest: Good morrow, Brutus, do we trouble you? I have been up this hour, awake all night.

Know I these men that come along with you? Yes, every man of them, and no man here But honours you, and every one doth wish You had but that opinion of yourself Which every noble Roman bears of you.

This, Casca, this, Cinna, and this, Metellus Cimber.

Here, as I point my sword, the sun arises, Which is a great way growing on the south, Weighing the youthful season of the year.

Some two months hence up higher toward the north He first presents his fire, and the high east Stands, as the Capitol, directly here.

But what of Cicero? shall we sound him? I think he will stand very strong with us.

O, name him not: let us not break with him, For he will never follow any thing That other men begin.

This shall make Our purpose necessary and not envious: Which so appearing to the common eyes, We shall be call'd purgers, not murderers.

And for Mark Antony, think not of him, For he can do no more than Caesar's arm When Caesar's head is off.

There is no fear in him, let him not die, For he will live, and laugh at this hereafter.

Let me work, For I can give his humour the true bent, And I will bring him to the Capitol.

By the eighth hour: is that the uttermost? Be that the uttermost, and fail not then.

Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard, Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey: I wonder none of you have thought of him.

Now, good Metellus, go along by him: He loves me well, and I have given him reasons, Send him but hither, and I'll fashion him.

The morning comes upon 's: we'll leave you, Brutus.

And, friends, disperse yourselves, but all remember What you have said, and show yourselves true Romans.

Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily, Let not our looks put on our purposes, But bear it as our Roman actors do, With untired spirits and formal constancy: And so good morrow to you every one.

Boy! Lucius! Fast asleep? It is no matter, Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber: Thou hast no figures nor no fantasies, Which busy care draws in the brains of men, Therefore thou sleep'st so sound.

Brutus, my lord! Portia, what mean you? wherefore rise you now? It is not for your health thus to commit Your weak condition to the raw cold morning.

It will not let you eat, nor talk, nor sleep, And could it work so much upon your shape As it hath much prevail'd on your condition, I should not know you, Brutus.

Dear my lord, Make me acquainted with your cause of grief.

Brutus is wise, and, were he not in health, He would embrace the means to come by it.

You are my true and honourable wife, As dear to me as are the ruddy drops That visit my sad heart If this were true, then should I know this secret.

I grant I am a woman, but withal A woman that Lord Brutus took to wife: I grant I am a woman, but withal A woman well-reputed, Cato's daughter.

All my engagements I will construe to thee, All the charactery of my sad brows: Leave me with haste.

Lucius, who's that knocks? Re-enter LUCIUS with LIGARIUS He is a sick man that would speak with you.

Caius Ligarius! how? Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.

O, what a time have you chose out, brave Caius, To wear a kerchief! Would you were not sick! I am not sick, if Brutus have in hand Any exploit worthy the name of honour.

Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius, Had you a healthful ear to hear of it.

By all the gods that Romans bow before, I here discard my sickness! Soul of Rome! Brave son, derived from honourable loins! Thou, like an exorcist, hast conjured up My mortified spirit.

Now bid me run, And I will strive with things impossible, Yea, get the better of them.

What's to do? A piece of work that will make sick men whole.

But are not some whole that we must make sick? That must we also.

What it is, my Caius, I shall unfold to thee, as we are going To whom it must be done.

Set on your foot, And with a heart new-fired I follow you, To do I know not what: but it sufficeth That Brutus leads me on.

What mean you, Caesar? think you to walk forth? You shall not stir out of your house to-day.

Caesar shall forth: the things that threaten'd me Ne'er look'd but on my back, when they shall see The face of Caesar, they are vanished.

Caesar, I never stood on ceremonies, Yet now they fright me.

There is one within, Besides the things that we have heard and seen, Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch.

O Caesar! these things are beyond all use, And I do fear them.

What can be avoided Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods? Yet Caesar shall go forth, for these predictions Are to the world in general as to Caesar.

When beggars die, there are no comets seen, The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.

Cowards die many times before their deaths, The valiant never taste of death but once.

It seems to me most strange that men should fear, Seeing that death, a necessary end, Will come when it will come.

Re-enter Servant What say the augurers? They would not have you to stir forth to-day.

Plucking the entrails of an offering forth, They could not find a heart within the beast.

The gods do this in shame of cowardice: Caesar should be a beast without a heart, If he should stay at home to-day for fear.

No, Caesar shall not: danger knows full well That Caesar is more dangerous than he: We are two lions litter'd in one day, And I the elder and more terrible: And Caesar shall go forth.

Alas, my lord, Your wisdom is consumed in confidence.

Do not go forth to-day: call it my fear That keeps you in the house, and not your own.

We'll send Mark Antony to the senate-house: And he shall say you are not well to-day: Let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.

Mark Antony shall say I am not well, And, for thy humour, I will stay at home.

Caesar, all hail! good morrow, worthy Caesar: I come to fetch you to the senate-house.

Shall Caesar send a lie? Have I in conquest stretch'd mine arm so far, To be afraid to tell graybeards the truth? Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.

Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause, Lest I be laugh'd at when I tell them so.

The cause is in my will: I will not come, That is enough to satisfy the senate.

I have, when you have heard what I can say: And know it now: the senate have concluded To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar.

If you shall send them word you will not come, Their minds may change.

Besides, it were a mock Apt to be render'd, for some one to say 'Break up the senate till another time, When Caesar's wife shall meet with better dreams.

If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper 'Lo, Caesar is afraid'? Pardon me, Caesar, for my dear dear love To our proceeding bids me tell you this, And reason to my love is liable.

How foolish do your fears seem now, Calpurnia! I am ashamed I did yield to them.

What, Brutus, are you stirr'd so early too? Good morrow, Casca.

Caius Ligarius, Caesar was ne'er so much your enemy As that same ague which hath made you lean.

See! Antony, that revels long o' nights, Is notwithstanding up.

Bid them prepare within: I am to blame to be thus waited for.

Now, Cinna: now, Metellus: what, Trebonius! I have an hour's talk in store for you, Remember that you call on me to-day: Be near me, that I may remember you.

Caesar, I will: and so near will I be, That your best friends shall wish I had been further.

Good friends, go in, and taste some wine with me, And we, like friends, will straightway go together.

There is but one mind in all these men, and it is bent against Caesar.

If thou beest not immortal, look about you: security gives way to conspiracy.

The mighty gods defend thee! Thy lover, Here will I stand till Caesar pass along, And as a suitor will I give him this.

My heart laments that virtue cannot live Out of the teeth of emulation.

If thou read this, O Caesar, thou mayst live, If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive.

I prithee, boy, run to the senate-house, Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone: Why dost thou stay? To know my errand, madam.

I would have had thee there, and here again, Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there.

O constancy, be strong upon my side, Set a huge mountain 'tween my heart and tongue! I have a man's mind, but a woman's might.

Hark, boy! what noise is that? I hear none, madam.

Prithee, listen well, I heard a bustling rumour, like a fray, And the wind brings it from the Capitol.

Come hither, fellow: which way hast thou been? At mine own house, good lady.

Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol? Madam, not yet: I go to take my stand, To see him pass on to the Capitol.

Thou hast some suit to Caesar, hast thou not? That I have, lady: if it will please Caesar To be so good to Caesar as to hear me, I shall beseech him to befriend himself.

Why, know'st thou any harm's intended towards him? None that I know will be, much that I fear may chance.

Ay me, how weak a thing The heart of woman is! O Brutus, The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise! Sure, the boy heard me: Brutus hath a suit That Caesar will not grant.

O, I grow faint. Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord, Say I am merry: come to me again, And bring me word what he doth say to thee.

A crowd of people, among them ARTEMIDORUS and the  Soothsayer.

Flourish. Enter CAESAR, BRUTUS,  CASSIUS, CASCA, DECIUS BRUTUS, METELLUS CIMBER,  TREBONIUS, CINNA, ANTONY, LEPIDUS, POPILIUS, PUBLIUS, and others Ay, Caesar, but not gone.

Trebonius doth desire you to o'erread, At your best leisure, this his humble suit.

O Caesar, read mine first, for mine's a suit That touches Caesar nearer: read it, great Caesar.

What, urge you your petitions in the street? Come to the Capitol.

CAESAR goes up to the Senate-House, the rest following I wish your enterprise to-day may thrive.

Advances to CAESAR What said Popilius Lena? He wish'd to-day our enterprise might thrive.

Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known, Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back, For I will slay myself.

Cassius, be constant: Popilius Lena speaks not of our purposes, For, look, he smiles, and Caesar doth not change.

Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him go, And presently prefer his suit to Caesar.

These couchings and these lowly courtesies Might fire the blood of ordinary men, And turn pre-ordinance and first decree Into the law of children.

Be not fond, To think that Caesar bears such rebel blood That will be thaw'd from the true quality With that which melteth fools, I mean, sweet words, Low-crooked court'sies and base spaniel-fawning.

Thy brother by decree is banished: If thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him, I spurn thee like a cur out of my way.

Know, Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause Will he be satisfied.

What, Brutus! Pardon, Caesar, Caesar, pardon: As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall, To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber.

Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead! Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.

Some to the common pulpits, and cry out 'Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!' People and senators, be not affrighted, Fly not, stand stiff: ambition's debt is paid.

Where's Publius? Here, quite confounded with this mutiny.

Stand fast together, lest some friend of Caesar's Should chance-- Talk not of standing.

Publius, good cheer, There is no harm intended to your person, Nor to no Roman else: so tell them, Publius.

And leave us, Publius, lest that the people, Rushing on us, should do your age some mischief.

Do so: and let no man abide this deed, But we the doers.

Re-enter TREBONIUS Where is Antony? Fled to his house amazed: Men, wives and children stare, cry out and run As it were doomsday.

Fates, we will know your pleasures: That we shall die, we know, 'tis but the time And drawing days out, that men stand upon.

Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life Cuts off so many years of fearing death.

Grant that, and then is death a benefit: So are we Caesar's friends, that have abridged His time of fearing death.

What, shall we forth? Ay, every man away: Brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome.

So says my master Antony. Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman, I never thought him worse.

Tell him, so please him come unto this place, He shall be satisfied, and, by my honour, Depart untouch'd.

I wish we may: but yet have I a mind That fears him much, and my misgiving still Falls shrewdly to the purpose.

O mighty Caesar! dost thou lie so low? Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils, Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well.

I do beseech ye, if you bear me hard, Now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke, Fulfil your pleasure.

Live a thousand years, I shall not find myself so apt to die: No place will please me so, no mean of death, As here by Caesar, and by you cut off, The choice and master spirits of this age.

Your voice shall be as strong as any man's In the disposing of new dignities.

Only be patient till we have appeased The multitude, beside themselves with fear, And then we will deliver you the cause, Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him, Have thus proceeded.

Gentlemen all,--alas, what shall I say? My credit now stands on such slippery ground, That one of two bad ways you must conceit me, Either a coward or a flatterer.

Pardon me, Julius! Here wast thou bay'd, brave hart, Here didst thou fall, and here thy hunters stand, Sign'd in thy spoil, and crimson'd in thy lethe.

O world, thou wast the forest to this hart, And this, indeed, O world, the heart of thee.

How like a deer, strucken by many princes, Dost thou here lie! Mark Antony,-- Pardon me, Caius Cassius: The enemies of Caesar shall say this, Then, in a friend, it is cold modesty.

Friends am I with you all and love you all, Upon this hope, that you shall give me reasons Why and wherein Caesar was dangerous.

Or else were this a savage spectacle: Our reasons are so full of good regard That were you, Antony, the son of Caesar, You should be satisfied.

That's all I seek: And am moreover suitor that I may Produce his body to the market-place, And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend, Speak in the order of his funeral.

O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth, That I am meek and gentle with these butchers! Thou art the ruins of the noblest man That ever lived in the tide of times.

You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not? I do, Mark Antony.

He did receive his letters, and is coming, And bid me say to you by word of mouth-- O Caesar!-- Seeing the body Thy heart is big, get thee apart and weep.

Passion, I see, is catching, for mine eyes, Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine, Began to water.

Is thy master coming? He lies to-night within seven leagues of Rome.

Post back with speed, and tell him what hath chanced: Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome, No Rome of safety for Octavius yet, Hie hence, and tell him so.

Cassius, go you into the other street, And part the numbers.

Those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here, Those that will follow Cassius, go with him, And public reasons shall be rendered Of Caesar's death.

I will hear Cassius, and compare their reasons, When severally we hear them rendered.

The noble Brutus is ascended: silence! Be patient till the last.

If there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of Caesar's, to him I say, that Brutus' love to Caesar was no less than his.

If then that friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar, this is my answer: --Not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome more.

There is tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honour for his valour, and death for his ambition.

Who is here so base that would be a bondman? If any, speak, for him have I offended.

Who is here so rude that would not be a Roman? If any, speak, for him have I offended.

Who is here so vile that will not love his country? If any, speak, for him have I offended.

I have done no more to Caesar than you shall do to Brutus.

The question of his death is enrolled in the Capitol, his glory not extenuated, wherein he was worthy, nor his offences enforced, for which he suffered death.

Live, Brutus! live, live! Bring him with triumph home unto his house.

We'll bring him to his house With shouts and clamours.

I do entreat you, not a man depart, Save I alone, till Antony have spoke.

Let him go up into the public chair, We'll hear him.

Noble Antony, go up. For Brutus' sake, I am beholding to you.

Goes into the pulpit What does he say of Brutus? He says, for Brutus' sake, He finds himself beholding to us all.

Nay, that's certain: We are blest that Rome is rid of him.

Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears, I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.

The evil that men do lives after them, The good is oft interred with their bones, So let it be with Caesar.

The noble Brutus Hath told you Caesar was ambitious: If it were so, it was a grievous fault, And grievously hath Caesar answer'd it.

Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest-- For Brutus is an honourable man, So are they all, all honourable men-- Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral.

He was my friend, faithful and just to me: But Brutus says he was ambitious, And Brutus is an honourable man.

You all did see that on the Lupercal I thrice presented him a kingly crown, Which he did thrice refuse: was this ambition? Yet Brutus says he was ambitious, And, sure, he is an honourable man.

I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke, But here I am to speak what I do know.

You all did love him once, not without cause: What cause withholds you then, to mourn for him? O judgment! thou art fled to brutish beasts, And men have lost their reason.

Bear with me, My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar, And I must pause till it come back to me.

If thou consider rightly of the matter, Caesar has had great wrong.

Has he, masters? I fear there will a worse come in his place.

Mark'd ye his words? He would not take the crown, Therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious.

But yesterday the word of Caesar might Have stood against the world, now lies he there.

Have patience, gentle friends, I must not read it, It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you.

Will you be patient? will you stay awhile? I have o'ershot myself to tell you of it: I fear I wrong the honourable men Whose daggers have stabb'd Caesar, I do fear it.

They were traitors: honourable men! The will! the testament! They were villains, murderers: the will! read the will.

You will compel me, then, to read the will? Then make a ring about the corpse of Caesar, And let me show you him that made the will.

Shall I descend? and will you give me leave? Come down.

O, what a fall was there, my countrymen! Then I, and you, and all of us fell down, Whilst bloody treason flourish'd over us.

O, now you weep, and, I perceive, you feel The dint of pity: these are gracious drops.

Kind souls, what, weep you when you but behold Our Caesar's vesture wounded? Look you here, Here is himself, marr'd, as you see, with traitors.

O piteous spectacle! O noble Caesar! O woful day! O traitors, villains! O most bloody sight! We will be revenged.

Revenge! About! Seek! Burn! Fire! Kill! Slay! Let not a traitor live! Stay, countrymen.

We'll hear him, we'll follow him, we'll die with him.

Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up To such a sudden flood of mutiny.

They that have done this deed are honourable: What private griefs they have, alas, I know not, That made them do it: they are wise and honourable, And will, no doubt, with reasons answer you.

Most noble Antony! Why, friends, you go to do you know not what: Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves? Alas, you know not: I must tell you then: You have forgot the will I told you of.

The will! Let's stay and hear the will. Here is the will, and under Caesar's seal.

To every Roman citizen he gives, To every several man, seventy-five drachmas.

Here was a Caesar! when comes such another? Never, never.

Come, away, away! We'll burn his body in the holy place, And with the brands fire the traitors' houses.

Mischief, thou art afoot, Take thou what course thou wilt! How now, fellow! Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome.

Where is he? He and Lepidus are at Caesar's house.

And thither will I straight to visit him: He comes upon a wish.

Fortune is merry, And in this mood will give us any thing.

I heard him say, Brutus and Cassius Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome.

Belike they had some notice of the people, How I had moved them.

Bring me to Octavius. I dreamt to-night that I did feast with Caesar, And things unlucky charge my fantasy: I have no will to wander forth of doors, Yet something leads me forth.

What is your name? Whither are you going? Where do you dwell? Are you a married man or a bachelor? Answer every man directly.

What is my name? Whither am I going? Where do I dwell? Am I a married man or a bachelor? Then, to answer every man directly and briefly, wisely and truly: wisely I say, I am a bachelor.

That's as much as to say, they are fools that marry: you'll bear me a bang for that, I fear.

Proceed, directly. Directly, I am going to Caesar's funeral.

Tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his bad verses.

It is no matter, his name's Cinna, pluck but his name out of his heart, and turn him going.

Your brother too must die, consent you, Lepidus? I do consent-- Prick him down, Antony.

Upon condition Publius shall not live, Who is your sister's son, Mark Antony.

But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar's house, Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine How to cut off some charge in legacies.

What, shall I find you here? Or here, or at the Capitol.

You may do your will, But he's a tried and valiant soldier.

So is my horse, Octavius, and for that I do appoint him store of provender: It is a creature that I teach to fight, To wind, to stop, to run directly on, His corporal motion govern'd by my spirit.

Let us do so: for we are at the stake, And bay'd about with many enemies, And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear, Millions of mischiefs.

Enter BRUTUS, LUCILIUS, LUCIUS, and Soldiers, TITINIUS and PINDARUS meeting them Stand, ho! Give the word, ho! and stand.

What now, Lucilius! is Cassius near? He is at hand, and Pindarus is come To do you salutation from his master.

Your master, Pindarus, In his own change, or by ill officers, Hath given me some worthy cause to wish Things done, undone: but, if he be at hand, I shall be satisfied.

I do not doubt But that my noble master will appear Such as he is, full of regard and honour.

A word, Lucilius, How he received you, let me be resolved.

With courtesy and with respect enough, But not with such familiar instances, Nor with such free and friendly conference, As he hath used of old.

Thou hast described A hot friend cooling: ever note, Lucilius, When love begins to sicken and decay, It useth an enforced ceremony.

Comes his army on? They mean this night in Sardis to be quarter'd, The greater part, the horse in general, Are come with Cassius.

Judge me, you gods! wrong I mine enemies? And, if not so, how should I wrong a brother? Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs, And when you do them-- Cassius, be content.

Bid our commanders lead their charges off A little from this ground.

Lucilius, do you the like, and let no man Come to our tent till we have done our conference.

In such a time as this it is not meet That every nice offence should bear his comment.

Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself Are much condemn'd to have an itching palm, To sell and mart your offices for gold To undeservers.

I an itching palm! You know that you are Brutus that speak this, Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.

The name of Cassius honours this corruption, And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.

Brutus, bay not me, I'll not endure it: you forget yourself, To hedge me in, I am a soldier, I, Older in practise, abler than yourself To make conditions.

Urge me no more, I shall forget myself, Have mind upon your health, tempt me no further.

Away, slight man! Is't possible? Hear me, for I will speak.

Is it come to this? You say you are a better soldier: Let it appear so, make your vaunting true, And it shall please me well: for mine own part, I shall be glad to learn of noble men.

You wrong me every way, you wrong me, Brutus, I said, an elder soldier, not a better: Did I say 'better'? If you did, I care not.

When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.

I durst not! What, durst not tempt him! For your life you durst not! Do not presume too much upon my love, I may do that I shall be sorry for.

There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats, For I am arm'd so strong in honesty That they pass by me as the idle wind, Which I respect not.

I did not: he was but a fool that brought My answer back.

Brutus hath rived my heart: A friend should bear his friend's infirmities, But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.

A flatterer's would not, though they do appear As huge as high Olympus.

Sheathe your dagger: Be angry when you will, it shall have scope, Do what you will, dishonour shall be humour.

O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb That carries anger as the flint bears fire, Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark, And straight is cold again.

Hath Cassius lived To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus, When grief, and blood ill-temper'd, vexeth him? When I spoke that, I was ill-temper'd too.

There is some grudge between 'em, 'tis not meet They be alone.

How now! what's the matter? For shame, you generals! what do you mean? Love, and be friends, as two such men should be, For I have seen more years, I'm sure, than ye.

Ha, ha! how vilely doth this cynic rhyme! Get you hence, sirrah, saucy fellow, hence! Bear with him, Brutus, 'tis his fashion.

I'll know his humour, when he knows his time: What should the wars do with these jigging fools? Companion, hence! Away, away, be gone.

Lucilius and Titinius, bid the commanders Prepare to lodge their companies to-night.

And come yourselves, and bring Messala with you Immediately to us.

Lucius, a bowl of wine! I did not think you could have been so angry.

Of your philosophy you make no use, If you give place to accidental evils.

O ye immortal gods! Re-enter LUCIUS, with wine and taper Speak no more of her.

Give me a bowl of wine. In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius.

Fill, Lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup, I cannot drink too much of Brutus' love.

Come in, Titinius! Re-enter TITINIUS, with MESSALA Welcome, good Messala.

Now sit we close about this taper here, And call in question our necessities.

Messala, I have here received letters, That young Octavius and Mark Antony Come down upon us with a mighty power, Bending their expedition toward Philippi.

With what addition? That by proscription and bills of outlawry, Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus, Have put to death an hundred senators.

Therein our letters do not well agree, Mine speak of seventy senators that died By their proscriptions, Cicero being one.

Cicero one! Cicero is dead, And by that order of proscription.

Had you your letters from your wife, my lord? No, Messala.

Nor nothing in your letters writ of her? Nothing, Messala.

Why ask you? hear you aught of her in yours? No, my lord.

Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell: For certain she is dead, and by strange manner.

We must die, Messala: With meditating that she must die once, I have the patience to endure it now.

I have as much of this in art as you, But yet my nature could not bear it so.

What do you think Of marching to Philippi presently? I do not think it good.

Your reason? This it is: 'Tis better that the enemy seek us: So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers, Doing himself offence, whilst we, lying still, Are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness.

Good reasons must, of force, give place to better.

You must note beside, That we have tried the utmost of our friends, Our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe: The enemy increaseth every day, We, at the height, are ready to decline.

There is a tide in the affairs of men, Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune, Omitted, all the voyage of their life Is bound in shallows and in miseries.

On such a full sea are we now afloat, And we must take the current when it serves, Or lose our ventures.

Then, with your will, go on, We'll along ourselves, and meet them at Philippi.

The deep of night is crept upon our talk, And nature must obey necessity, Which we will niggard with a little rest.

Good night: Early to-morrow will we rise, and hence.

Noble, noble Cassius, Good night, and good repose.

O my dear brother! This was an ill beginning of the night: Never come such division 'tween our souls! Let it not, Brutus.

What, thou speak'st drowsily? Poor knave, I blame thee not, thou art o'er-watch'd.

Call Claudius and some other of my men: I'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.

Varro and Claudius! Calls my lord? I pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep, It may be I shall raise you by and by On business to my brother Cassius.

So please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure.

I will not have it so: lie down, good sirs, It may be I shall otherwise bethink me.

Look, Lucius, here's the book I sought for so, I put it in the pocket of my gown.

VARRO and CLAUDIUS lie down I was sure your lordship did not give it me.

Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile, And touch thy instrument a strain or two? Ay, my lord, an't please you.

It does, my boy: I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing.

I should not urge thy duty past thy might, I know young bloods look for a time of rest.

It was well done, and thou shalt sleep again, I will not hold thee long: if I do live, I will be good to thee.

Let me see, let me see, is not the leaf turn'd down Where I left reading? Here it is, I think.

How ill this taper burns! Ha! who comes here? I think it is the weakness of mine eyes That shapes this monstrous apparition.

Art thou any thing? Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil, That makest my blood cold and my hair to stare? Speak to me what thou art.

Why comest thou? To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi.

Well, then I shall see thee again? Ay, at Philippi.

Now I have taken heart thou vanishest: Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee.

Boy, Lucius! Varro! Claudius! Sirs, awake! Claudius! The strings, my lord, are false.

Lucius, awake! My lord? Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out? My lord, I do not know that I did cry.

Yes, that thou didst: didst thou see any thing? Nothing, my lord.

Sirrah Claudius! To VARRO Fellow thou, awake! My lord? My lord? Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep? Did we, my lord? Ay: saw you any thing? No, my lord, I saw nothing.

Go and commend me to my brother Cassius, Bid him set on his powers betimes before, And we will follow.

Prepare you, generals: The enemy comes on in gallant show, Their bloody sign of battle is hung out, And something to be done immediately.

Octavius, lead your battle softly on, Upon the left hand of the even field.

Why do you cross me in this exigent? I do not cross you, but I will do so.

Enter BRUTUS, CASSIUS, and their Army, LUCILIUS, TITINIUS, MESSALA, and others They stand, and would have parley.

Mark Antony, shall we give sign of battle? No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge.

Words before blows: is it so, countrymen? Not that we love words better, as you do.

O, yes, and soundless too, For you have stol'n their buzzing, Antony, And very wisely threat before you sting.

O you flatterers! Flatterers! Now, Brutus, thank yourself: This tongue had not offended so to-day, If Cassius might have ruled.

Come, come, the cause: if arguing make us sweat, The proof of it will turn to redder drops.

Caesar, thou canst not die by traitors' hands, Unless thou bring'st them with thee.

So I hope, I was not born to die on Brutus' sword.

O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain, Young man, thou couldst not die more honourable.

Why, now, blow wind, swell billow and swim bark! The storm is up, and all is on the hazard.

BRUTUS and LUCILIUS converse apart This is my birth-day, as this very day Was Cassius born.

Give me thy hand, Messala: Be thou my witness that against my will, As Pompey was, am I compell'd to set Upon one battle all our liberties.

You know that I held Epicurus strong And his opinion: now I change my mind, And partly credit things that do presage.

I but believe it partly, For I am fresh of spirit and resolved To meet all perils very constantly.

But this same day Must end that work the ides of March begun, And whether we shall meet again I know not.

Therefore our everlasting farewell take: For ever, and for ever, farewell, Cassius! If we do meet again, why, we shall smile, If not, why then, this parting was well made.

For ever, and for ever, farewell, Brutus! If we do meet again, we'll smile indeed, If not, 'tis true this parting was well made.

O, that a man might know The end of this day's business ere it come! But it sufficeth that the day will end, And then the end is known.

Enter BRUTUS and MESSALA Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills Unto the legions on the other side.

Loud alarum Let them set on at once, for I perceive But cold demeanor in Octavius' wing, And sudden push gives them the overthrow.

Enter CASSIUS and TITINIUS O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly! Myself have to mine own turn'd enemy: This ensign here of mine was turning back, I slew the coward, and did take it from him.

O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early, Who, having some advantage on Octavius, Took it too eagerly: his soldiers fell to spoil, Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed.

Fly further off, my lord, fly further off, Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off.

Look, look, Titinius, Are those my tents where I perceive the fire? They are, my lord.

Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill, My sight was ever thick, regard Titinius, And tell me what thou notest about the field.

PINDARUS ascends the hill This day I breathed first: time is come round, And where I did begin, there shall I end, My life is run his compass.

Sirrah, what news? What news? With horsemen, that make to him on the spur, Yet he spurs on.

Now they are almost on him. Now, Titinius! Now some light.

Come now, keep thine oath, Now be a freeman: and with this good sword, That ran through Caesar's bowels, search this bosom.

Stand not to answer: here, take thou the hilts, And, when my face is cover'd, as 'tis now, Guide thou the sword.

PINDARUS stabs him Caesar, thou art revenged, Even with the sword that kill'd thee.

So, I am free, yet would not so have been, Durst I have done my will.

O Cassius, Far from this country Pindarus shall run, Where never Roman shall take note of him.

Re-enter TITINIUS with MESSALA It is but change, Titinius, for Octavius Is overthrown by noble Brutus' power, As Cassius' legions are by Antony.

Where did you leave him? All disconsolate, With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill.

Is not that he t hat lies upon the ground? He lies not like the living.

O my heart! Is not that he? No, this was he, Messala, But Cassius is no more.

Hie you, Messala, And I will seek for Pindarus the while.

Brutus, come apace, And see how I regarded Caius Cassius.

By your leave, gods:--this is a Roman's part Come, Cassius' sword, and find Titinius' heart.

Re-enter MESSALA, with BRUTUS, CATO, STRATO, VOLUMNIUS, and LUCILIUS Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie? Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it.

O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet! Thy spirit walks abroad and turns our swords In our own proper entrails.

Friends, I owe more tears To this dead man than you shall see me pay.

Come, therefore, and to Thasos send his body: His funerals shall not be in our camp, Lest it discomfort us.

Lucilius, come, And come, young Cato, let us to the field.

Labeo and Flavius, set our battles on: 'Tis three o'clock, and, Romans, yet ere night We shall try fortune in a second fight.

Only I yield to die: There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight, Offering money Kill Brutus, and be honour'd in his death.

A noble prisoner! Room, ho! Tell Antony, Brutus is ta'en.

Here comes the general. Brutus is ta'en, Brutus is ta'en, my lord.

This is not Brutus, friend, but, I assure you, A prize no less in worth: keep this man safe, Give him all kindness: I had rather have Such men my friends than enemies.

Go on, And see whether Brutus be alive or dead, And bring us word unto Octavius' tent How every thing is chanced.

Statilius show'd the torch-light, but, my lord, He came not back: he is or ta'en or slain.

Sit thee down, Clitus: slaying is the word, It is a deed in fashion.

Hark thee, Clitus. What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world.

Shall I do such a deed? O Dardanius! O Clitus! What ill request did Brutus make to thee? To kill him, Clitus.

Look, he meditates. Now is that noble vessel full of grief, That it runs over even at his eyes.

What says my lord? Why, this, Volumnius: The ghost of Caesar hath appear'd to me Two several times by night, at Sardis once, And, this last night, here in Philippi fields: I know my hour is come.

Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes, Our enemies have beat us to the pit: Low alarums It is more worthy to leap in ourselves, Than tarry till they push us.

Good Volumnius, Thou know'st that we two went to school together: Even for that our love of old, I prithee, Hold thou my sword-hilts, whilst I run on it.

Alarum still Fly, fly, my lord, there is no tarrying here.

Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep, Farewell to thee too, Strato.

Countrymen, My heart doth joy that yet in all my life I found no man but he was true to me.

I shall have glory by this losing day More than Octavius and Mark Antony By this vile conquest shall attain unto.

So fare you well at once, for Brutus' tongue Hath almost ended his life's history: Night hangs upon mine eyes, my bones would rest, That have but labour'd to attain this hour.

I prithee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord: Thou art a fellow of a good respect, Thy life hath had some smatch of honour in it: Hold then my sword, and turn away thy face, While I do run upon it.

Runs on his sword Caesar, now be still: I kill'd not thee with half so good a will.

Retreat. Enter OCTAVIUS, ANTONY, MESSALA, LUCILIUS, and the army What man is that? My master's man.

Strato, where is thy master? Free from the bondage you are in, Messala: The conquerors can but make a fire of him, For Brutus only overcame himself, And no man else hath honour by his death.

I thank thee, Brutus, That thou hast proved Lucilius' saying true.

Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me? Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you.

How died my master, Strato? I held the sword, and he did run on it.

Octavius, then take him to follow thee, That did the latest service to my master.

This was the noblest Roman of them all: All the conspirators save only he Did that they did in envy of great Caesar, He only, in a general honest thought And common good to all, made one of them.

Within my tent his bones to-night shall lie, Most like a soldier, order'd honourably.

So call the field to rest, and let's away, To part the glories of this happy day.

I thought the king had more affected the Duke of Albany than Cornwall.

Is not this your son, my lord? His breeding, sir, hath been at my charge: I have so often blushed to acknowledge him, that now I am brazed to it.

Sir, this young fellow's mother could: whereupon she grew round-wombed, and had, indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she had a husband for her bed.

Do you smell a fault? I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so proper.

Do you know this noble gentleman, Edmund? No, my lord.

My lord of Kent: remember him hereafter as my honourable friend.

He hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.

Enter KING LEAR, CORNWALL, ALBANY, GONERIL, REGAN, CORDELIA, and Attendants Attend the lords of France and Burgundy, Gloucester.

Know that we have divided In three our kingdom: and 'tis our fast intent To shake all cares and business from our age, Conferring them on younger strengths, while we Unburthen'd crawl toward death.

Our son of Cornwall, And you, our no less loving son of Albany, We have this hour a constant will to publish Our daughters' several dowers, that future strife May be prevented now.

The princes, France and Burgundy, Great rivals in our youngest daughter's love, Long in our court have made their amorous sojourn, And here are to be answer'd.

What says our second daughter, Our dearest Regan, wife to Cornwall? Speak.

Sir, I am made Of the self-same metal that my sister is, And prize me at her worth.

And yet not so, since, I am sure, my love's More richer than my tongue.

To thee and thine hereditary ever Remain this ample third of our fair kingdom, No less in space, validity, and pleasure, Than that conferr'd on Goneril.

Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave My heart into my mouth: I love your majesty According to my bond, nor more nor less.

How, how, Cordelia! mend your speech a little, Lest it may mar your fortunes.

Good my lord, You have begot me, bred me, loved me: I Return those duties back as are right fit, Obey you, love you, and most honour you.

So young, and so untender? So young, my lord, and true.

The barbarous Scythian, Or he that makes his generation messes To gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom Be as well neighbour'd, pitied, and relieved, As thou my sometime daughter.

Good my liege,-- Peace, Kent! Come not between the dragon and his wrath.

I loved her most, and thought to set my rest On her kind nursery.

Hence, and avoid my sight! So be my grave my peace, as here I give Her father's heart from her! Call France, who stirs? Call Burgundy.

Cornwall and Albany, With my two daughters' dowers digest this third: Let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her.

I do invest you jointly with my power, Pre-eminence, and all the large effects That troop with majesty.

Ourself, by monthly course, With reservation of an hundred knights, By you to be sustain'd, shall our abode Make with you by due turns.

Only we still retain The name, and all the additions to a king, The sway, revenue, execution of the rest, Beloved sons, be yours: which to confirm, This coronet part betwixt you.

Let it fall rather, though the fork invade The region of my heart: be Kent unmannerly, When Lear is mad.

What wilt thou do, old man? Think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak, When power to flattery bows? To plainness honour's bound, When majesty stoops to folly.

My life I never held but as a pawn To wage against thy enemies, nor fear to lose it, Thy safety being the motive.

Out of my sight! See better, Lear, and let me still remain The true blank of thine eye.

Now, by Apollo,-- Now, by Apollo, king, Thou swear'st thy gods in vain.

O, vassal! miscreant! Laying his hand on his sword Dear sir, forbear.

Kill thy physician, and the fee bestow Upon thy foul disease.

Revoke thy doom, Or, whilst I can vent clamour from my throat, I'll tell thee thou dost evil.

Fare thee well, king: sith thus thou wilt appear, Freedom lives hence, and banishment is here.

Thus Kent, O princes, bids you all adieu, He'll shape his old course in a country new.

Re-enter GLOUCESTER, with KING OF FRANCE, BURGUNDY, and Attendants Here's France and Burgundy, my noble lord.

Right noble Burgundy, When she was dear to us, we did hold her so, But now her price is fall'n.

Sir, there she stands: If aught within that little seeming substance, Or all of it, with our displeasure pieced, And nothing more, may fitly like your grace, She's there, and she is yours.

Then leave her, sir, for, by the power that made me, I tell you all her wealth.

Better thou Hadst not been born than not to have pleased me better.

Royal Lear, Give but that portion which yourself proposed, And here I take Cordelia by the hand, Duchess of Burgundy.

I am sorry, then, you have so lost a father That you must lose a husband.

Peace be with Burgundy! Since that respects of fortune are his love, I shall not be his wife.

Fairest Cordelia, that art most rich, being poor, Most choice, forsaken, and most loved, despised! Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon: Be it lawful I take up what's cast away.

Gods, gods! 'tis strange that from their cold'st neglect My love should kindle to inflamed respect.

Thy dowerless daughter, king, thrown to my chance, Is queen of us, of ours, and our fair France: Not all the dukes of waterish Burgundy Can buy this unprized precious maid of me.

Bid them farewell, Cordelia, though unkind: Thou losest here, a better where to find.

Thou hast her, France: let her be thine, for we Have no such daughter, nor shall ever see That face of hers again.

Therefore be gone Without our grace, our love, our benison.

Exeunt all but KING OF FRANCE, GONERIL, REGAN, and CORDELIA Bid farewell to your sisters.

The jewels of our father, with wash'd eyes Cordelia leaves you: I know you what you are, And like a sister am most loath to call Your faults as they are named.

Use well our father: To your professed bosoms I commit him But yet, alas, stood I within his grace, I would prefer him to a better place.

Let your study Be to content your lord, who hath received you At fortune's alms.

You have obedience scanted, And well are worth the want that you have wanted.

Time shall unfold what plaited cunning hides: Who cover faults, at last shame them derides.

Sister, it is not a little I have to say of what most nearly appertains to us both.

That's most certain, and with you, next month with us.

'Tis the infirmity of his age: yet he hath ever but slenderly known himself.

Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this of Kent's banishment.

There is further compliment of leavetaking between France and him.

Pray you, let's hit together: if our father carry authority with such dispositions as he bears, this last surrender of his will but offend us.

Thou, nature, art my goddess, to thy law My services are bound.

Putting up the letter Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter? I know no news, my lord.

No? What needed, then, that terrible dispatch of it into your pocket? the quality of nothing hath not such need to hide itself.

Let's see: come, if it be nothing, I shall not need spectacles.

I beseech you, sir, pardon me: it is a letter from my brother, that I have not all o'er-read, and for so much as I have perused, I find it not fit for your o'er-looking.

The contents, as in part I understand them, are to blame.

I hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote this but as an essay or taste of my virtue.

the world bitter to the best of our times, keeps our fortunes from us till our oldness cannot relish them.

I begin to find an idle and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny, who sways, not as it hath power, but as it is suffered.

You know the character to be your brother's? If the matter were good, my lord, I durst swear it were his, but, in respect of that, I would fain think it were not.

It is his hand, my lord, but I hope his heart is not in the contents.

I dare pawn down my life for him, that he hath wrote this to feel my affection to your honour, and to no further pretence of danger.

To his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him.

Heaven and earth! Edmund, seek him out: wind me into him, I pray you: frame the business after your own wisdom.

I would unstate myself, to be in a due resolution.

I will seek him, sir, presently: convey the business as I shall find means and acquaint you withal.

This villain of mine comes under the prediction, there's son against father: the king falls from bias of nature, there's father against child.

We have seen the best of our time: machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all ruinous disorders, follow us disquietly to our graves.

Find out this villain, Edmund, it shall lose thee nothing, do it carefully.

And the noble and true-hearted Kent banished! his offence, honesty! 'Tis strange.

Tut, I should have been that I am, had the maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastardizing.

Edgar-- And pat he comes like the catastrophe of the old comedy: my cue is villanous melancholy, with a sigh like Tom o' Bedlam.

O, these eclipses do portend these divisions! fa, sol, la, mi.

How now, brother Edmund! what serious contemplation are you in? I am thinking, brother, of a prediction I read this other day, what should follow these eclipses.

How long have you been a sectary astronomical? Come, come, when saw you my father last? Why, the night gone by.

Parted you in good terms? Found you no displeasure in him by word or countenance? None at all.

Shall I hear from you anon? I do serve you in this business.

A credulous father! and a brother noble, Whose nature is so far from doing harms, That he suspects none: on whose foolish honesty My practises ride easy! I see the business.

Let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit: All with me's meet that I can fashion fit.

Did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool? Yes, madam.

By day and night he wrongs me, every hour He flashes into one gross crime or other, That sets us all at odds: I'll not endure it: His knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us On every trifle.

When he returns from hunting, I will not speak with him, say I am sick: If you come slack of former services, You shall do well, the fault of it I'll answer.

Idle old man, That still would manage those authorities That he hath given away! Now, by my life, Old fools are babes again, and must be used With cheques as flatteries,--when they are seen abused.

Prepare for dinner. If but as well I other accents borrow, That can my speech defuse, my good intent May carry through itself to that full issue For which I razed my likeness.

Now, banish'd Kent, If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn'd, So may it come, thy master, whom thou lovest, Shall find thee full of labours.

Enter KING LEAR, Knights, and Attendants Let me not stay a jot for dinner, go get it ready.

What art thou? A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the king.

If thou be as poor for a subject as he is for a king, thou art poor enough.

What wouldst thou? Who wouldst thou serve? Dost thou know me, fellow? No, sir, but you have that in your countenance which I would fain call master.

How old art thou? Not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor so old to dote on her for any thing: I have years on my back forty eight.

Follow me, thou shalt serve me: if I like thee no worse after dinner, I will not part from thee yet.

Dinner, ho, dinner! Where's my knave? my fool? Go you, and call my fool hither.

You, you, sirrah, where's my daughter? So please you,-- What says the fellow there? Call the clotpoll back.

Re-enter Knight How now! where's that mongrel? He says, my lord, your daughter is not well.

Why came not the slave back to me when I called him.

Ha! sayest thou so? I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, if I be mistaken, for my duty cannot be silent when I think your highness wronged.

But where's my fool? I have not seen him this two days.

Since my young lady's going into France, sir, the fool hath much pined away.

Go you, and tell my daughter I would speak with her.

Re-enter OSWALD O, you sir, you, come you hither, sir: who am I, My lady's father.

'My lady's father'! my lord's knave: your whoreson dog! you slave! you cur! I am none of these, my lord, I beseech your pardon.

Do you bandy looks with me, you rascal? Striking him I'll not be struck, my lord.

Tripping up his heels I thank thee, fellow, thou servest me, and I'll love thee.

Come, sir, arise, away! I'll teach you differences: away, away! if you will measure your lubber's length again, tarry: but away! go to, have you wisdom? so.

Pushes OSWALD out Now, my friendly knave, I thank thee: there's earnest of thy service.

Giving KENT money Let me hire him too: here's my coxcomb.

Offering KENT his cap How now, my pretty knave! how dost thou? Sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.

How now, nuncle! Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters! Why, my boy? If I gave them all my living, I'ld keep my coxcombs myself.

There's mine, beg another of thy daughters. Take heed, sirrah, the whip.

Truth's a dog must to kennel, he must be whipped out, when Lady the brach may stand by the fire and stink.

A pestilent gall to me! Sirrah, I'll teach thee a speech.

Then 'tis like the breath of an unfee'd lawyer, you gave me nothing for't.

Can you make no use of nothing, nuncle? Why, no, boy, nothing can be made out of nothing.

A bitter fool! Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitter fool and a sweet fool? No, lad, teach me.

Dost thou call me fool, boy? All thy other titles thou hast given away, that thou wast born with.

No, faith, lords and great men will not let me, if I had a monopoly out, they would have part on't: and ladies too, they will not let me have all fool to myself, they'll be snatching.

Give me an egg, nuncle, and I'll give thee two crowns.

What two crowns shall they be? Why, after I have cut the egg i' the middle, and eat up the meat, the two crowns of the egg.

When thou clovest thy crown i' the middle, and gavest away both parts, thou borest thy ass on thy back o'er the dirt: thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown, when thou gavest thy golden one away.

If I speak like myself in this, let him be whipped that first finds it so.

Fools had ne'er less wit in a year, For wise men are grown foppish, They know not how their wits to wear, Their manners are so apish.

Prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to lie: I would fain learn to lie.

I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are: they'll have me whipped for speaking true, thou'lt have me whipped for lying, and sometimes I am whipped for holding my peace.

I had rather be any kind o' thing than a fool: and yet I would not be thee, nuncle, thou hast pared thy wit o' both sides, and left nothing i' the middle: here comes one o' the parings.

How now, daughter! what makes that frontlet on? Methinks you are too much of late i' the frown.

Thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for her frowning, now thou art an O without a figure: I am better than thou art now, I am a fool, thou art nothing.

To GONERIL Yes, forsooth, I will hold my tongue, so your face bids me, though you say nothing.

Mum, mum, He that keeps nor crust nor crum, Weary of all, shall want some.

Not only, sir, this your all-licensed fool, But other of your insolent retinue Do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth In rank and not-to-be endured riots.

Sir, I had thought, by making this well known unto you, To have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful, By what yourself too late have spoke and done.

For, you trow, nuncle, The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long, That it's had it head bit off by it young.

So, out went the candle, and we were left darkling.

Are you our daughter? Come, sir, I would you would make use of that good wisdom, Whereof I know you are fraught, and put away These dispositions, that of late transform you From what you rightly are.

May not an ass know when the cart draws the horse? Whoop, Jug! I love thee.

Doth any here know me? This is not Lear: Doth Lear walk thus? speak thus? Where are his eyes? Either his notion weakens, his discernings Are lethargied--Ha! waking? 'tis not so.

Who is it that can tell me who I am? Lear's shadow.

I would learn that, for, by the marks of sovereignty, knowledge, and reason, I should be false persuaded I had daughters.

Your name, fair gentlewoman? This admiration, sir, is much o' the savour Of other your new pranks.

I do beseech you To understand my purposes aright: As you are old and reverend, you should be wise.

Darkness and devils! Saddle my horses, call my train together: Degenerate bastard! I'll not trouble thee.

You strike my people, and your disorder'd rabble Make servants of their betters.

Woe, that too late repents,-- To ALBANY O, sir, are you come? Is it your will? Speak, sir.

Prepare my horses. Ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend, More hideous when thou show'st thee in a child Than the sea-monster! Pray, sir, be patient.

My train are men of choice and rarest parts, That all particulars of duty know, And in the most exact regard support The worships of their name.

O most small fault, How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show! That, like an engine, wrench'd my frame of nature From the fix'd place, drew from heart all love, And added to the gall.

O Lear, Lear, Lear! Beat at this gate, that let thy folly in, Striking his head And thy dear judgment out! Go, go, my people.

My lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant Of what hath moved you.

Yea, it is come to this? Let is be so: yet have I left a daughter, Who, I am sure, is kind and comfortable: When she shall hear this of thee, with her nails She'll flay thy wolvish visage.

Thou shalt find That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think I have cast off for ever: thou shalt, I warrant thee.

Do you mark that, my lord? I cannot be so partial, Goneril, To the great love I bear you,-- Pray you, content.

What, Oswald, ho! To the Fool You, sir, more knave than fool, after your master.

Nuncle Lear, nuncle Lear, tarry and take the fool with thee.

A fox, when one has caught her, And such a daughter, Should sure to the slaughter, If my cap would buy a halter: So the fool follows after.

Safer than trust too far: Let me still take away the harms I fear, Not fear still to be taken: I know his heart.

Take you some company, and away to horse: Inform her full of my particular fear, And thereto add such reasons of your own As may compact it more.

No, no, my lord, This milky gentleness and course of yours Though I condemn not, yet, under pardon, You are much more attask'd for want of wisdom Than praised for harmful mildness.

How far your eyes may pierce I can not tell: Striving to better, oft we mar what's well.

Acquaint my daughter no further with any thing you know than comes from her demand out of the letter.

If your diligence be not speedy, I shall be there afore you.

I will not sleep, my lord, till I have delivered your letter.

If a man's brains were in's heels, were't not in danger of kibes? Ay, boy.

Why, what canst thou tell, my boy? She will taste as like this as a crab does to a crab.

Thou canst tell why one's nose stands i' the middle on's face? Why, to keep one's eyes of either side's nose, that what a man cannot smell out, he may spy into.

I did her wrong-- Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell? Nor I neither, but I can tell why a snail has a house.

Why, to put his head in, not to give it away to his daughters, and leave his horns without a case.

So kind a father! Be my horses ready? Thy asses are gone about 'em.

The reason why the seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason.

Because they are not eight? Yes, indeed: thou wouldst make a good fool.

To take 't again perforce! Monster ingratitude! If thou wert my fool, nuncle, I'ld have thee beaten for being old before thy time.

How's that? Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise.

O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven Keep me in temper: I would not be mad! How now! are the horses ready? Ready, my lord.

She that's a maid now, and laughs at my departure, Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter.

I have been with your father, and given him notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan his duchess will be here with him this night.

Fare you well, sir. The duke be here to-night? The better! best! This weaves itself perforce into my business.

I hear my father coming: pardon me: In cunning I must draw my sword upon you Draw, seem to defend yourself, now quit you well.

Torches, torches! So, farewell. Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion.

Wounds his arm Of my more fierce endeavour: I have seen drunkards Do more than this in sport.

When by no means he could-- Pursue him, ho! Go after.

Let him fly far: Not in this land shall he remain uncaught, And found--dispatch.

Strong and fasten'd villain Would he deny his letter? I never got him.

Tucket within Hark, the duke's trumpets! I know not why he comes.

How now, my noble friend! since I came hither, Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.

If it be true, all vengeance comes too short Which can pursue the offender.

No marvel, then, though he were ill affected: 'Tis they have put him on the old man's death, To have the expense and waste of his revenues.

I have this present evening from my sister Been well inform'd of them, and with such cautions, That if they come to sojourn at my house, I'll not be there.

Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father A child-like office.

He did bewray his practise, and received This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.

If he be taken, he shall never more Be fear'd of doing harm: make your own purpose, How in my strength you please.

For you, Edmund, Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant So much commend itself, you shall be ours: Natures of such deep trust we shall much need, You we first seize on.

Our good old friend, Lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow Your needful counsel to our business, Which craves the instant use.

I serve you, madam: Your graces are right welcome.

Good dawning to thee, friend: art of this house? Where may we set our horses? I' the mire.

If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold, I would make thee care for me.

Drawing his sword Away! I have nothing to do with thee.

Help, ho! murder! help! Strike, you slave, stand, rogue, stand, you neat slave, strike.

Beating him Help, ho! murder! murder! How now! What's the matter? With you, goodman boy, an you please: come, I'll flesh ye, come on, young master.

Weapons! arms! What 's the matter here? Keep peace, upon your lives: He dies that strikes again.

What is the matter? The messengers from our sister and the king.

You cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee: a tailor made thee.

Thou art a strange fellow: a tailor make a man? Ay, a tailor, sir: a stone-cutter or painter could not have made him so ill, though he had been but two hours at the trade.

Spare my gray beard, you wagtail? Peace, sirrah! You beastly knave, know you no reverence? Yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege.

Why art thou angry? That such a slave as this should wear a sword, Who wears no honesty.

A plague upon your epileptic visage! Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool? Goose, if I had you upon Sarum plain, I'ld drive ye cackling home to Camelot.

Why, art thou mad, old fellow? How fell you out? say that.

No contraries hold more antipathy Than I and such a knave.

Why dost thou call him a knave?  What's his offence? His countenance likes me not.

Sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain: I have seen better faces in my time Than stands on any shoulder that I see Before me at this instant.

These kind of knaves I know, which in this plainness Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends Than twenty silly ducking observants That stretch their duties nicely.

I know, sir, I am no flatterer: he that beguiled you in a plain accent was a plain knave, which for my part I will not be, though I should win your displeasure to entreat me to 't.

None of these rogues and cowards But Ajax is their fool.

Fetch forth the stocks! As I have life and honour, There shall he sit till noon.

Till noon! till night, my lord, and all night too.

Why, madam, if I were your father's dog, You should not use me so.

This is a fellow of the self-same colour Our sister speaks of.

My sister may receive it much more worse, To have her gentleman abused, assaulted, For following her affairs.

Put in his legs. KENT is put in the stocks Come, my good lord, away.

I am sorry for thee, friend, 'tis the duke's pleasure, Whose disposition, all the world well knows, Will not be rubb'd nor stopp'd: I'll entreat for thee.

Pray, do not, sir: I have watched and travell'd hard, Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle.

A good man's fortune may grow out at heels: Give you good morrow! The duke's to blame in this, 'twill be ill taken.

All weary and o'erwatch'd, Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold This shameful lodging.

Fortune, good night: smile once more: turn thy wheel! I heard myself proclaim'd, And by the happy hollow of a tree Escaped the hunt.

No port is free, no place, That guard, and most unusual vigilance, Does not attend my taking.

Poor Turlygod! poor Tom! That's something yet: Edgar I nothing am.

'Tis strange that they should so depart from home, And not send back my messenger.

As I learn'd, The night before there was no purpose in them Of this remove.

Hail to thee, noble master! Makest thou this shame thy pastime? No, my lord.

Your son and daughter found this trespass worth The shame which here it suffers.

Winter's not gone yet, if the wild-geese fly that way.

Fathers that wear rags Do make their children blind, But fathers that bear bags Shall see their children kind.

Fortune, that arrant whore, Ne'er turns the key to the poor.

But, for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours for thy daughters as thou canst tell in a year.

O, how this mother swells up toward my heart! Hysterica passio, down, thou climbing sorrow, Thy element's below! Where is this daughter? With the earl, sir, here within.

Made you no more offence but what you speak of? How chance the king comes with so small a train? And thou hadst been set i' the stocks for that question, thou hadst well deserved it.

Why, fool? We'll set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee there's no labouring i' the winter.

All that follow their noses are led by their eyes but blind men, and there's not a nose among twenty but can smell him that's stinking.

Let go thy hold when a great wheel runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with following it: but the great one that goes up the hill, let him draw thee after.

When a wise man gives thee better counsel, give me mine again: I would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.

Where learned you this, fool? Not i' the stocks, fool.

Re-enter KING LEAR with GLOUCESTER Deny to speak with me? They are sick? they are weary? They have travell'd all the night? Mere fetches, The images of revolt and flying off.

My dear lord, You know the fiery quality of the duke, How unremoveable and fix'd he is In his own course.

Vengeance! plague! death! confusion! Fiery? what quality? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester, I'ld speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.

Inform'd them! Dost thou understand me, man? Ay, my good lord.

Death on my state! wherefore Looking on KENT Should he sit here? This act persuades me That this remotion of the duke and her Is practise only.

Give me my servant forth. Go tell the duke and 's wife I'ld speak with them, Now, presently: bid them come forth and hear me, Or at their chamber-door I'll beat the drum Till it cry sleep to death.

Hail to your grace! KENT is set at liberty I am glad to see your highness.

Regan, I think you are, I know what reason I have to think so: if thou shouldst not be glad, I would divorce me from thy mother's tomb, Sepulchring an adultress.

To KENT O, are you free? Some other time for that.

You less know how to value her desert Than she to scant her duty.

Nature in you stands on the very verge Of her confine: you should be ruled and led By some discretion, that discerns your state Better than you yourself.

Therefore, I pray you, That to our sister you do make return, Say you have wrong'd her, sir.

Ask her forgiveness? Do you but mark how this becomes the house: 'Dear daughter, I confess that I am old, Age is unnecessary: on my knees I beg That you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.

Good sir, no more, these are unsightly tricks: Return you to my sister.

No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse: Thy tender-hefted nature shall not give Thee o'er to harshness: her eyes are fierce, but thine Do comfort and not burn.

Who put my man i' the stocks? Tucket within What trumpet's that? I know't, my sister's: this approves her letter, That she would soon be here.

Is your lady come? This is a slave, whose easy-borrow'd pride Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.

Out, varlet, from my sight! What means your grace? Who stock'd my servant? Regan, I have good hope Thou didst not know on't.

O sides, you are too tough, Will you yet hold? How came my man i' the stocks? I set him there, sir: but his own disorders Deserved much less advancement.

You! did you? I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.

Return with her? Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter To this detested groom.

Not altogether so: I look'd not for you yet, nor am provided For your fit welcome.

Give ear, sir, to my sister, For those that mingle reason with your passion Must be content to think you old, and so-- But she knows what she does.

Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance From those that she calls servants or from mine? Why not, my lord? If then they chanced to slack you, We could control them.

If you will come to me,-- For now I spy a danger,--I entreat you To bring but five and twenty: to no more Will I give place or notice.

Made you my guardians, my depositaries, But kept a reservation to be follow'd With such a number.

What, must I come to you With five and twenty, Regan? said you so? And speak't again, my lord, no more with me.

Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favour'd, When others are more wicked: not being the worst Stands in some rank of praise.

To GONERIL I'll go with thee: Thy fifty yet doth double five and twenty, And thou art twice her love.

You think I'll weep No, I'll not weep: I have full cause of weeping, but this heart Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws, Or ere I'll weep.

O fool, I shall go mad! Storm and tempest Let us withdraw, 'twill be a storm.

This house is little: the old man and his people Cannot be well bestow'd.

'Tis his own blame, hath put himself from rest, And must needs taste his folly.

For his particular, I'll receive him gladly, But not one follower.

Where is my lord of Gloucester? Follow'd the old man forth: he is return'd.

Whither is he going? He calls to horse, but will I know not whither.

Alack, the night comes on, and the bleak winds Do sorely ruffle, for many miles a bout There's scarce a bush.

O, sir, to wilful men, The injuries that they themselves procure Must be their schoolmasters.

Shut up your doors: He is attended with a desperate train, And what they may incense him to, being apt To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.

Shut up your doors, my lord, 'tis a wild night: My Regan counsels well, come out o' the storm.

Enter KENT and a Gentleman, meeting Who's there, besides foul weather? One minded like the weather, most unquietly.

This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch, The lion and the belly-pinched wolf Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs, And bids what will take all.

But who is with him? None but the fool, who labours to out-jest His heart-struck injuries.

Sir, I do know you, And dare, upon the warrant of my note, Commend a dear thing to you.

I am a gentleman of blood and breeding, And, from some knowledge and assurance, offer This office to you.

For confirmation that I am much more Than my out-wall, open this purse, and take What it contains.

If you shall see Cordelia,-- As fear not but you shall,--show her this ring, And she will tell you who your fellow is That yet you do not know.

Good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters' blessing: here's a night pities neither wise man nor fool.

O! O! 'tis foul! He that has a house to put's head in has a good The cod-piece that will house Before the head has any, The head and he shall louse, So beggars marry many.

The man that makes his toe What he his heart should make Shall of a corn cry woe, And turn his sleep to wake.

For there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a glass.

No, I will be the pattern of all patience, I will say nothing.

Who's there? Marry, here's grace and a cod-piece, that's a wise man and a fool.

Let the great gods, That keep this dreadful pother o'er our heads, Find out their enemies now.

Come on, my boy: how dost, my boy? art cold? I am cold myself.

Where is this straw, my fellow? The art of our necessities is strange, That can make vile things precious.

Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart That's sorry yet for thee.

He that has and a little tiny wit-- With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,-- Must make content with his fortunes fit, For the rain it raineth every day.

Come, bring us to this hovel. This is a brave night to cool a courtezan.

This prophecy Merlin shall make, for I live before his time.

Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural dealing.

Most savage and unnatural! Go to, say you nothing.

I will seek him, and privily relieve him: go you and maintain talk with the duke, that my charity be not of him perceived: if he ask for me.

I am ill, and gone to bed. Though I die for it, as no less is threatened me, the king my old master must be relieved.

There is some strange thing toward, Edmund, pray you, be careful.

Here is the place, my lord, good my lord, enter: The tyranny of the open night's too rough For nature to endure.

Good my lord, enter. Thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm Invades us to the skin: so 'tis to thee, But where the greater malady is fix'd, The lesser is scarce felt.

Thou'ldst shun a bear, But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea, Thou'ldst meet the bear i' the mouth.

When the mind's free, The body's delicate: the tempest in my mind Doth from my senses take all feeling else Save what beats there.

Filial ingratitude! Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand For lifting food to't? But I will punish home: No, I will weep no more.

In such a night To shut me out! Pour on, I will endure.

In such a night as this! O Regan, Goneril! Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all,-- O, that way madness lies, let me shun that, No more of that.

Prithee, go in thyself: seek thine own ease: This tempest will not give me leave to ponder On things would hurt me more.

The Fool runs out from the hovel Come not in here, nuncle, here's a spirit Help me, help me! Give me thy hand.

Who's there? A spirit, a spirit: he says his name's poor Tom.

What art thou that dost grumble there i' the straw? Come forth.

Away! the foul fiend follows me! Through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind.

Bless thy five wits! Tom's a-cold,--O, do de, do de, do de.

Bless thee from whirlwinds, star-blasting, and taking! Do poor Tom some charity, whom the foul fiend vexes: there could I have him now,--and there,--and there again, and there.

Storm still What, have his daughters brought him to this pass? Couldst thou save nothing? Didst thou give them all? Nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all shamed.

Now, all the plagues that in the pendulous air Hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters! He hath no daughters, sir.

Death, traitor! nothing could have subdued nature To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.

Is it the fashion, that discarded fathers Should have thus little mercy on their flesh? Judicious punishment! 'twas this flesh begot Those pelican daughters.

Pillicock sat on Pillicock-hill: Halloo, halloo, loo, loo! This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.

Take heed o' the foul fiend: obey thy parents, keep thy word justly, swear not, commit not with man's sworn spouse, set not thy sweet heart on proud array.

Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks betray thy poor heart to woman: keep thy foot out of brothels, thy hand out of plackets, thy pen from lenders' books, and defy the foul fiend.

Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind: Says suum, mun, ha, no, nonny.

Storm still Why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies.

Thou owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep no wool, the cat no perfume.

Ha! here's three on 's are sophisticated! Thou art the thing itself: unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor bare, forked animal as thou art.

Tearing off his clothes Prithee, nuncle, be contented, 'tis a naughty night to swim in.

Now a little fire in a wild field were like an old lecher's heart, a small spark, all the rest on's body cold.

Peace, Smulkin, peace, thou fiend! What, hath your grace no better company? The prince of darkness is a gentleman: Modo he's call'd, and Mahu.

Our flesh and blood is grown so vile, my lord, That it doth hate what gets it.

What is the cause of thunder? Good my lord, take his offer, go into the house.

What is your study? How to prevent the fiend, and to kill vermin.

Importune him once more to go, my lord, His wits begin to unsettle.

What a night's this! I do beseech your grace,-- O, cry your mercy, sir.

In, fellow, there, into the hovel: keep thee warm.

Good my lord, soothe him, let him take the fellow.

Child Rowland to the dark tower came, His word was still,--Fie, foh, and fum, I smell the blood of a British man.

If the matter of this paper be certain, you have mighty business in hand.

True or false, it hath made thee earl of Gloucester.

Seek out where thy father is, that he may be ready for our apprehension.

-I will persevere in my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.

I will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer father in my love.

Here is better than the open air, take it thankfully.

I will piece out the comfort with what addition I can: I will not be long from you.

All the power of his wits have given way to his impatience: the gods reward your kindness! Frateretto calls me, and tells me Nero is an angler in the lake of darkness.

Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a yeoman? A king, a king! No, he's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son, for he's a mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman before him.

To have a thousand with red burning spits Come hissing in upon 'em,-- The foul fiend bites my back.

He's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a horse's health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.

To EDGAR Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer, To the Fool Thou, sapient sir, sit here.

The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a nightingale.

Hopdance cries in Tom's belly for two white herring.

How do you, sir? Stand you not so amazed: Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions? I'll see their trial first.

Bring in the evidence. To EDGAR Thou robed man of justice, take thy place, To the Fool And thou, his yoke-fellow of equity, Bench by his side: To KENT you are o' the commission, Sit you too.

Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd? Thy sheep be in the corn, And for one blast of thy minikin mouth, Thy sheep shall take no harm.

I here take my oath before this honourable assembly, she kicked the poor king her father.

And here's another, whose warp'd looks proclaim What store her heart is made on.

The little dogs and all, Tray, Blanch, and Sweet-heart, see, they bark at me.

Sessa! Come, march to wakes and fairs and market-towns.

Poor Tom, thy horn is dry. Then let them anatomize Regan, see what breeds about her heart.

Make no noise, make no noise, draw the curtains: so, so, so.

We'll go to supper i' he morning. So, so, so. And I'll go to bed at noon.

Re-enter GLOUCESTER Come hither, friend: where is the king my master? Here, sir, but trouble him not, his wits are gone.

Oppressed nature sleeps: This rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses, Which, if convenience will not allow, Stand in hard cure.

To the Fool Come, help to bear thy master, Thou must not stay behind.

When we our betters see bearing our woes, We scarcely think our miseries our foes.

Who alone suffers suffers most i' the mind, Leaving free things and happy shows behind: But then the mind much sufferance doth o'er skip, When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.

What will hap more to-night, safe 'scape the king! Lurk, lurk.

Post speedily to my lord your husband, show him this letter: the army of France is landed.

Edmund, keep you our sister company: the revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous father are not fit for your beholding.

Advise the duke, where you are going, to a most festinate preparation: we are bound to the like.

Our posts shall be swift and intelligent betwixt us.

Farewell, dear sister: farewell, my lord of Gloucester.

Go seek the traitor Gloucester, Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.

Though well we may not pass upon his life Without the form of justice, yet our power Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men May blame, but not control.

Who's there? the traitor? Ingrateful fox! 'tis he.

What mean your graces? Good my friends, consider You are my guests: do me no foul play, friends.

O filthy traitor! Unmerciful lady as you are, I'm none.

Villain, thou shalt find-- REGAN plucks his beard By the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done To pluck me by the beard.

What will you do? Come, sir, what letters had you late from France? Be simple answerer, for we know the truth.

And what confederacy have you with the traitors Late footed in the kingdom? To whose hands have you sent the lunatic king? Speak.

I have a letter guessingly set down, Which came from one that's of a neutral heart, And not from one opposed.

Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charged at peril-- Wherefore to Dover? Let him first answer that.

I am tied to the stake, and I must stand the course.

Wherefore to Dover, sir? Because I would not see thy cruel nails Pluck out his poor old eyes, nor thy fierce sister In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.

The sea, with such a storm as his bare head In hell-black night endured, would have buoy'd up, And quench'd the stelled fires: Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.

If wolves had at thy gate howl'd that stern time, Thou shouldst have said 'Good porter, turn the key,' All cruels else subscribed: but I shall see The winged vengeance overtake such children.

Fellows, hold the chair. Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot.

He that will think to live till he be old, Give me some help! O cruel! O you gods! One side will mock another, the other too.

If you see vengeance,-- Hold your hand, my lord: I have served you ever since I was a child, But better service have I never done you Than now to bid you hold.

How now, you dog! If you did wear a beard upon your chin, I'd shake it on this quarrel.

What do you mean? My villain! They draw and fight Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.

A peasant stand up thus! Takes a sword, and runs at him behind O, I am slain! My lord, you have one eye left To see some mischief on him.

Out, vile jelly! Where is thy lustre now? All dark and comfortless.

Where's my son Edmund? Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature, To quit this horrid act.

Out, treacherous villain! Thou call'st on him that hates thee: it was he That made the overture of thy treasons to us, Who is too good to pity thee.

Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him! Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell His way to Dover.

How is't, my lord? how look you? I have received a hurt: follow me, lady.

Turn out that eyeless villain, throw this slave Upon the dunghill.

Regan, I bleed apace: Untimely comes this hurt: give me your arm.

I'll never care what wickedness I do, If this man come to good.

If she live long, And in the end meet the old course of death, Women will all turn monsters.

Let's follow the old earl, and get the Bedlam To lead him where he would: his roguish madness Allows itself to any thing.

Go thou: I'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs To apply to his bleeding face.

Now, heaven help him! Yet better thus, and known to be contemn'd, Than still contemn'd and flatter'd.

To be worst, The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune, Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear: The lamentable change is from the best, The worst returns to laughter.

Welcome, then, Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace! The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst Owes nothing to thy blasts.

But who comes here? My father, poorly led? World, world, O world! But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee, Lie would not yield to age.

O, my good lord, I have been your tenant, and your father's tenant, these fourscore years.

Away, get thee away, good friend, be gone: Thy comforts can do me no good at all, Thee they may hurt.

I have no way, and therefore want no eyes, I stumbled when I saw: full oft 'tis seen, Our means secure us, and our mere defects Prove our commodities.

O dear son Edgar, The food of thy abused father's wrath! Might I but live to see thee in my touch, I'ld say I had eyes again! How now! Who's there? the worst'? I am worse than e'er I was.

Fellow, where goest? Is it a beggar-man? Madman and beggar too.

I' the last night's storm I such a fellow saw, Which made me think a man a worm: my son Came then into my mind, and yet my mind Was then scarce friends with him: I have heard more since.

Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow, Angering itself and others.

-Bless thee, master! Is that the naked fellow? Ay, my lord.

'Tis the times' plague, when madmen lead the blind.

Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure, Above the rest, be gone.

I'll bring him the best 'parel that I have, Come on't what will.

Know'st thou the way to Dover? Both stile and gate, horse-way and foot-path.

Welcome, my lord: I marvel our mild husband Not met us on the way.

Now, where's your master'? Madam, within, but never man so changed.

It is the cowish terror of his spirit, That dares not undertake: he'll not feel wrongs Which tie him to an answer.

Back, Edmund, to my brother, Hasten his musters and conduct his powers: I must change arms at home, and give the distaff Into my husband's hands.

This trusty servant Shall pass between us: ere long you are like to hear, If you dare venture in your own behalf, A mistress's command.

Wear this, spare speech, Giving a favour Decline your head: this kiss, if it durst speak, Would stretch thy spirits up into the air: Conceive, and fare thee well.

My most dear Gloucester! O, the difference of man and man! To thee a woman's services are due: My fool usurps my body.

O Goneril! You are not worth the dust which the rude wind Blows in your face.

Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile: Filths savour but themselves.

O vain fool! Thou changed and self-cover'd thing, for shame, Be-monster not thy feature.

Were't my fitness To let these hands obey my blood, They are apt enough to dislocate and tear Thy flesh and bones: howe'er thou art a fiend, A woman's shape doth shield thee.

Marry, your manhood now-- What news? O, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwall's dead: Slain by his servant, going to put out The other eye of Gloucester.

This shows you are above, You justicers, that these our nether crimes So speedily can venge! But, O poor Gloucester! Lost he his other eye? Both, both, my lord.

This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer, 'Tis from your sister.

But being widow, and my Gloucester with her, May all the building in my fancy pluck Upon my hateful life: another way, The news is not so tart.

-I'll read, and answer. Where was his son when they did take his eyes? Come with my lady hither.

Knows he the wickedness? Ay, my good lord, 'twas he inform'd against him, And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment Might have the freer course.

Gloucester, I live To thank thee for the love thou show'dst the king, And to revenge thine eyes.

Come hither, friend: Tell me what more thou know'st.

Who hath he left behind him general? The Marshal of France, Monsieur La Far.

Not to a rage: patience and sorrow strove Who should express her goodliest.

In brief, Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved, If all could so become it.

It is the stars, The stars above us, govern our conditions, Else one self mate and mate could not beget Such different issues.

You spoke not with her since? Was this before the king return'd? No, since.

Well, sir, the poor distressed Lear's i' the town, Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers What we are come about, and by no means Will yield to see his daughter.

Alack, poor gentleman! Of Albany's and Cornwall's powers you heard not? 'Tis so, they are afoot.

A century send forth, Search every acre in the high-grown field, And bring him to our eye.

What can man's wisdom In the restoring his bereaved sense? He that helps him take all my outward worth.

There is means, madam: Our foster-nurse of nature is repose, The which he lacks, that to provoke in him, Are many simples operative, whose power Will close the eye of anguish.

News, madam, The British powers are marching hitherward.

'Tis known before, our preparation stands In expectation of them.

O dear father, It is thy business that I go about, Therefore great France My mourning and important tears hath pitied.

No blown ambition doth our arms incite, But love, dear love, and our aged father's right: Soon may I hear and see him! But are my brother's powers set forth? Ay, madam.

Himself in person there? Madam, with much ado: Your sister is the better soldier.

Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home? No, madam.

What might import my sister's letter to him? I know not, lady.

Our troops set forth to-morrow: stay with us, The ways are dangerous.

I may not, madam: My lady charged my duty in this business.

Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you Transport her purposes by word? Belike, Something--I know not what: I'll love thee much, Let me unseal the letter.

Madam, I had rather-- I know your lady does not love her husband, I am sure of that: and at her late being here She gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks To noble Edmund.

If you do find him, pray you, give him this, And when your mistress hears thus much from you, I pray, desire her call her wisdom to her.

If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor, Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.

Would I could meet him, madam! I should show What party I do follow.

When shall we come to the top of that same hill? You do climb up it now: look, how we labour.

Why, then, your other senses grow imperfect By your eyes' anguish.

So may it be, indeed: Methinks thy voice is alter'd, and thou speak'st In better phrase and matter than thou didst.

You're much deceived: in nothing am I changed But in my garments.

I'll look no more, Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight Topple down headlong.

Give me your hand: you are now within a foot Of the extreme verge: for all beneath the moon Would I not leap upright.

Here, friend, 's another purse, in it a jewel Well worth a poor man's taking: fairies and gods Prosper it with thee! Go thou farther off, Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.

Why I do trifle thus with his despair Is done to cure it.

If Edgar live, O, bless him! Now, fellow, fare thee well.

And yet I know not how conceit may rob The treasury of life, when life itself Yields to the theft: had he been where he thought, By this, had thought been past.

Alive or dead? Ho, you sir! friend! Hear you, sir! speak! Thus might he pass indeed: yet he revives.

Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air, So many fathom down precipitating, Thou'dst shiver'd like an egg: but thou dost breathe, Hast heavy substance, bleed'st not, speak'st, art sound.

Ten masts at each make not the altitude Which thou hast perpendicularly fell: Thy life's a miracle.

Speak yet again. But have I fall'n, or no? From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.

Look up a-height, the shrill-gorged lark so far Cannot be seen or heard: do but look up.

Is wretchedness deprived that benefit, To end itself by death? 'Twas yet some comfort, When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage, And frustrate his proud will.

How is 't? Feel you your legs? You stand. Too well, too well.

Upon the crown o' the cliff, what thing was that Which parted from you? A poor unfortunate beggar.

I do remember now: henceforth I'll bear Affliction till it do cry out itself 'Enough, enough,' and die.

That thing you speak of, I took it for a man, often 'twould say 'The fiend, the fiend:' he led me to that place.

But who comes here? The safer sense will ne'er accommodate His master thus.

No, they cannot touch me for coining, I am the king himself.

O thou side-piercing sight! Nature's above art in that respect.

That fellow handles his bow like a crow-keeper: draw me a clothier's yard.

Look, look, a mouse! Peace, peace, this piece of toasted cheese will do 't.

Bring up the brown bills. O, well flown, bird! i' the clout, i' the clout: hewgh! Give the word.

Ha! Goneril, with a white beard! They flattered me like a dog, and told me I had white hairs in my beard ere the black ones were there.

To say 'ay' and 'no' to every thing that I said!--'Ay' and 'no' too was no good divinity.

When the rain came to wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter, when the thunder would not peace at my bidding, there I found 'em, there I smelt 'em out.

Go to, they are not men o' their words: they told me I was every thing, 'tis a lie, I am not ague-proof.

The trick of that voice I do well remember: Is 't not the king? Ay, every inch a king: When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.

What was thy cause? Adultery? Thou shalt not die: die for adultery! No: The wren goes to 't, and the small gilded fly Does lecher in my sight.

Let copulation thrive, for Gloucester's bastard son Was kinder to his father than my daughters Got 'tween the lawful sheets.

O, let me kiss that hand! Let me wipe it first, it smells of mortality.

O ruin'd piece of nature! This great world Shall so wear out to nought.

Dost thou know me? I remember thine eyes well enough.

Dost thou squiny at me? No, do thy worst, blind Cupid! I'll not love.

Read thou this challenge, mark but the penning of it.

I would not take this from report, it is, And my heart breaks at it.

What, with the case of eyes? O, ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your head, nor no money in your purse? Your eyes are in a heavy case, your purse in a light, yet you see how this world goes.

What, art mad? A man may see how this world goes with no eyes.

Look with thine ears: see how yond justice rails upon yond simple thief.

Hark, in thine ear: change places, and, handy-dandy, which is the justice, which is the thief? Thou hast seen a farmer's dog bark at a beggar? Ay, sir.

And the creature run from the cur? There thou mightst behold the great image of authority: a dog's obeyed in office.

Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand! Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back, Thou hotly lust'st to use her in that kind For which thou whipp'st her.

The usurer hangs the cozener. Through tatter'd clothes small vices do appear, Robes and furr'd gowns hide all.

Plate sin with gold, And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks: Arm it in rags, a pigmy's straw does pierce it.

None does offend, none, I say, none, I'll able 'em: Take that of me, my friend, who have the power To seal the accuser's lips.

Get thee glass eyes, And like a scurvy politician, seem To see the things thou dost not.

Now, now, now, now: Pull off my boots: harder, harder: so.

O, matter and impertinency mix'd! Reason in madness! If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.

I know thee well enough, thy name is Gloucester: Thou must be patient, we came crying hither: Thou know'st, the first time that we smell the air, We wawl and cry.

Sir, Your most dear daughter-- No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even The natural fool of fortune.

No seconds? all myself? Why, this would make a man a man of salt, To use his eyes for garden water-pots, Ay, and laying autumn's dust.

Good sir,-- I will die bravely, like a bridegroom.

What! I will be jovial: come, come, I am a king, My masters, know you that.

Nay, if you get it, you shall get it with running.

Sa, sa, sa, sa. A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch, Past speaking of in a king! Thou hast one daughter, Who redeems nature from the general curse Which twain have brought her to.

Sir, speed you: what's your will? Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward? Most sure and vulgar: every one hears that, Which can distinguish sound.

But, by your favour, How near's the other army? Near and on speedy foot, the main descry Stands on the hourly thought.

Though that the queen on special cause is here, Her army is moved on.

You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me: Let not my worser spirit tempt me again To die before you please! Well pray you, father.

Now, good sir, what are you? A most poor man, made tame to fortune's blows, Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows, Am pregnant to good pity.

Hearty thanks: The bounty and the benison of heaven To boot, and boot! A proclaim'd prize! Most happy! That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh To raise my fortunes.

Thou old unhappy traitor, Briefly thyself remember: the sword is out That must destroy thee.

Now let thy friendly hand Put strength enough to't.

EDGAR interposes Wherefore, bold peasant, Darest thou support a publish'd traitor? Hence, Lest that the infection of his fortune take Like hold on thee.

Let go his arm. Ch'ill not let go, zir, without vurther 'casion.

Let go, slave, or thou diest! Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor volk pass.

An chud ha' bin zwaggered out of my life, 'twould not ha' bin zo long as 'tis by a vortnight.

Nay, come not near th' old man, keep out, che vor ye, or ise try whether your costard or my ballow be the harder: ch'ill be plain with you.

Out, dunghill! Ch'ill pick your teeth, zir: come, no matter vor your foins.

What, is he dead? Sit you down, father, rest you Let's see these pockets: the letters that he speaks of May be my friends.

He's dead, I am only sorry He had no other death's-man.

Let us see: Leave, gentle wax, and, manners, blame us not: To know our enemies' minds, we'ld rip their hearts, Their papers, is more lawful.

You have many opportunities to cut him off: if your will want not, time and place will be fruitfully offered.

There is nothing done, if he return the conqueror: then am I the prisoner, and his bed my goal, from the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply the place for your labour.

Give me your hand: Drum afar off Far off, methinks, I hear the beaten drum: Come, father, I'll bestow you with a friend.

soft music playing, Gentleman, and others attending.

O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work, To match thy goodness? My life will be too short, And every measure fail me.

All my reports go with the modest truth, Nor more nor clipp'd, but so.

Be better suited: These weeds are memories of those worser hours: I prithee, put them off.

Pardon me, dear madam, Yet to be known shortens my made intent: My boon I make it, that you know me not Till time and I think meet.

To the Doctor How does the king? Madam, sleeps still.

Be govern'd by your knowledge, and proceed I' the sway of your own will.

Is he array'd? Ay, madam, in the heaviness of his sleep We put fresh garments on him.

Be by, good madam, when we do awake him, I doubt not of his temperance.

He wakes, speak to him. Madam, do you, 'tis fittest.

Sir, do you know me? You are a spirit, I know: when did you die? Still, still, far wide! He's scarce awake: let him alone awhile.

Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight? I am mightily abused.

I know not what to say. I will not swear these are my hands: let's see, I feel this pin prick.

Would I were assured Of my condition! O, look upon me, sir, And hold your hands in benediction o'er me: No, sir, you must not kneel.

Pray, do not mock me: I am a very foolish fond old man, Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less, And, to deal plainly, I fear I am not in my perfect mind.

Do not laugh at me, For, as I am a man, I think this lady To be my child Cordelia.

I pray, weep not: If you have poison for me, I will drink it.

I know you do not love me, for your sisters Have, as I do remember, done me wrong: You have some cause, they have not.

Be comforted, good madam: the great rage, You see, is kill'd in him: and yet it is danger To make him even o'er the time he has lost.

Desire him to go in, trouble him no more Till further settling.

Will't please your highness walk? You must bear with me: Pray you now, forget and forgive: I am old and foolish.

Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain? Most certain, sir.

Who is conductor of his people? As 'tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.

They say Edgar, his banished son, is with the Earl of Kent in Germany.

'Tis time to look about, the powers of the kingdom approach apace.

My point and period will be throughly wrought, Or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought.

Know of the duke if his last purpose hold, Or whether since he is advised by aught To change the course: he's full of alteration And self-reproving: bring his constant pleasure.

To a Gentleman, who goes out Our sister's man is certainly miscarried.

Now, sweet lord, You know the goodness I intend upon you: Tell me--but truly--but then speak the truth, Do you not love my sister? In honour'd love.

But have you never found my brother's way To the forfended place? That thought abuses you.

I am doubtful that you have been conjunct And bosom'd with her, as far as we call hers.

I never shall endure her: dear my lord, Be not familiar with her.

Fear me not: She and the duke her husband! Should loosen him and me.

Sir, this I hear, the king is come to his daughter, With others whom the rigor of our state Forced to cry out.

Why is this reason'd? Combine together 'gainst the enemy, For these domestic and particular broils Are not the question here.

Let's then determine With the ancient of war on our proceedings.

Sister, you'll go with us? 'Tis most convenient, pray you, go with us.

As they are going out, enter EDGAR disguised If e'er your grace had speech with man so poor, Hear me one word.

Speak. Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.

If you have victory, let the trumpet sound For him that brought it: wretched though I seem, I can produce a champion that will prove What is avouched there.

If you miscarry, Your business of the world hath so an end, And machination ceases.

Fortune love you. Stay till I have read the letter.

When time shall serve, let but the herald cry, And I'll appear again.

Re-enter EDMUND The enemy's in view, draw up your powers.

Here is the guess of their true strength and forces By diligent discovery, but your haste Is now urged on you.

To both these sisters have I sworn my love, Each jealous of the other, as the stung Are of the adder.

Now then we'll use His countenance for the battle, which being done, Let her who would be rid of him devise His speedy taking off.

As for the mercy Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia, The battle done, and they within our power, Shall never see his pardon, for my state Stands on me to defend, not to debate.

Grace go with you, sir! Alarum and retreat within.

Re-enter EDGAR Away, old man, give me thy hand, away! King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en: Give me thy hand, come on.

What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure Their going hence, even as their coming hither, Ripeness is all: come on.

Some officers take them away: good guard, Until their greater pleasures first be known That are to censure them.

We are not the first Who, with best meaning, have incurr'd the worst.

For thee, oppressed king, am I cast down, Myself could else out-frown false fortune's frown.

Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia, The gods themselves throw incense.

Have I caught thee? He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven, And fire us hence like foxes.

Wipe thine eyes, The good-years shall devour them, flesh and fell, Ere they shall make us weep: we'll see 'em starve first.

Mark, I say, instantly, and carry it so As I have set it down.

I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats, If it be man's work, I'll do 't.

With him I sent the queen, My reason all the same, and they are ready To-morrow, or at further space, to appear Where you shall hold your session.

Sir, by your patience, I hold you but a subject of this war, Not as a brother.

Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded, Ere you had spoke so far.

He led our powers, Bore the commission of my place and person, The which immediacy may well stand up, And call itself your brother.

Not so hot: In his own grace he doth exalt himself, More than in your addition.

In my rights, By me invested, he compeers the best.

Holla, holla! That eye that told you so look'd but a-squint.

Lady, I am not well, else I should answer From a full-flowing stomach.

General, Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony, Dispose of them, of me, the walls are thine: Witness the world, that I create thee here My lord and master.

Mean you to enjoy him? The let-alone lies not in your good will.

If you will marry, make your loves to me, My lady is bespoke.

A herald, ho! A herald, ho, a herald! Trust to thy single virtue, for thy soldiers, All levied in my name, have in my name Took their discharge.

Come hither, herald,--Let the trumpet sound, And read out this.

First trumpet Second trumpet Third trumpet Trumpet answers within Ask him his purposes, why he appears Upon this call o' the trumpet.

What are you? Your name, your quality? and why you answer This present summons? Know, my name is lost, By treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit: Yet am I noble as the adversary I come to cope.

Say thou 'No,' This sword, this arm, and my best spirits, are bent To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak, Thou liest.

They fight. EDMUND falls Save him, save him! This is practise, Gloucester: By the law of arms thou wast not bound to answer An unknown opposite, thou art not vanquish'd, But cozen'd and beguiled.

Shut your mouth, dame, Or with this paper shall I stop it: Hold, sir: Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil: No tearing, lady: I perceive you know it.

Gives the letter to EDMUND Say, if I do, the laws are mine, not thine: Who can arraign me for't.

Most monstrous! oh! Know'st thou this paper? Ask me not what I know.

What you have charged me with, that have I done, And more, much more, the time will bring it out: 'Tis past, and so am I.

But what art thou That hast this fortune on me? If thou'rt noble, I do forgive thee.

I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund, If more, the more thou hast wrong'd me.

The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices Make instruments to plague us: The dark and vicious place where thee he got Cost him his eyes.

Thou hast spoken right, 'tis true, The wheel is come full circle: I am here.

Methought thy very gait did prophesy A royal nobleness: I must embrace thee: Let sorrow split my heart, if ever I Did hate thee or thy father! Worthy prince, I know't.

Where have you hid yourself? How have you known the miseries of your father? By nursing them, my lord.

This speech of yours hath moved me, And shall perchance do good: but speak you on, You look as you had something more to say.

If there be more, more woeful, hold it in, For I am almost ready to dissolve, Hearing of this.

This would have seem'd a period To such as love not sorrow, but another, To amplify too much, would make much more, And top extremity.

But who was this? Kent, sir, the banish'd Kent, who in disguise Follow'd his enemy king, and did him service Improper for a slave.

Help, help, O, help! What kind of help? Speak, man.

What means that bloody knife? 'Tis hot, it smokes, It came even from the heart of--O, she's dead! Who dead? speak, man.

Your lady, sir, your lady: and her sister By her is poisoned, she hath confess'd it.

I was contracted to them both: all three Now marry in an instant.

Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead: This judgment of the heavens, that makes us tremble, Touches us not with pity.

O, is this he? The time will not allow the compliment Which very manners urges.

Cover their faces. I pant for life: some good I mean to do, Despite of mine own nature.

Quickly send, Be brief in it, to the castle, for my writ Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia: Nay, send in time.

Run, run, O, run! To who, my lord? Who hath the office? send Thy token of reprieve.

Well thought on: take my sword, Give it the captain.

He hath commission from thy wife and me To hang Cordelia in the prison, and To lay the blame upon her own despair, That she fordid herself.

She's gone for ever! I know when one is dead, and when one lives, She's dead as earth.

Lend me a looking-glass, If that her breath will mist or stain the stone, Why, then she lives.

Is this the promised end Or image of that horror? Fall, and cease! This feather stirs, she lives! if it be so, It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows That ever I have felt.

A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all! I might have saved her, now she's gone for ever! Cordelia, Cordelia! stay a little.

Ha! What is't thou say'st? Her voice was ever soft, Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.

Did I not, fellow? I have seen the day, with my good biting falchion I would have made them skip: I am old now, And these same crosses spoil me.

Who are you? Mine eyes are not o' the best: I'll tell you straight.

If fortune brag of two she loved and hated, One of them we behold.

Are you not Kent? The same, Your servant Kent: Where is your servant Caius? He's a good fellow, I can tell you that, He'll strike, and quickly too: he's dead and rotten.

No, my good lord, I am the very man,-- I'll see that straight.

That, from your first of difference and decay, Have follow'd your sad steps.

Nor no man else: all's cheerless, dark, and deadly.

Your eldest daughters have fordone them selves, And desperately are dead.

He knows not what he says: and vain it is That we present us to him.

All friends shall taste The wages of their virtue, and all foes The cup of their deservings.

Do you see this? Look on her, look, her lips, Look there, look there! He faints! My lord, my lord! Break, heart, I prithee, break! Look up, my lord.

Vex not his ghost: O, let him pass! he hates him much That would upon the rack of this tough world Stretch him out longer.

The wonder is, he hath endured so long: He but usurp'd his life.

To KENT and EDGAR Friends of my soul, you twain Rule in this realm, and the gored state sustain.

I have a journey, sir, shortly to go, My master calls me, I must not say no.

The weight of this sad time we must obey, Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.

The oldest hath borne most: we that are young Shall never see so much, nor live so long.

I am resolved, 'tis but a three years' fast: The mind shall banquet, though the body pine: Fat paunches have lean pates, and dainty bits Make rich the ribs, but bankrupt quite the wits.

I can but say their protestation over, So much, dear liege, I have already sworn, That is, to live and study here three years.

Let me say no, my liege, an if you please: I only swore to study with your grace And stay here in your court for three years' space.

Things hid and barr'd, you mean, from common sense? Ay, that is study's godlike recompense.

If study's gain be thus and this be so, Study knows that which yet it doth not know: Swear me to this, and I will ne'er say no.

These be the stops that hinder study quite And train our intellects to vain delight.

Study me how to please the eye indeed By fixing it upon a fairer eye, Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed And give him light that it was blinded by.

Too much to know is to know nought but fame, And every godfather can give a name.

How well he's read, to reason against reading! Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding! He weeds the corn and still lets grow the weeding.

The spring is near when green geese are a-breeding.

Biron is like an envious sneaping frost, That bites the first-born infants of the spring.

So you, to study now it is too late, Climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate.

Give me the paper, let me read the same, And to the strict'st decrees I'll write my name.

How well this yielding rescues thee from shame! mile of my court:' Hath this been proclaimed? Four days ago.

Sweet lord, and why? To fright them hence with that dread penalty.

A dangerous law against gentility! 'Item, If any man be seen to talk with a woman within the term of three years, he shall endure such public shame as the rest of the court can possibly devise.

We must of force dispense with this decree, She must lie here on mere necessity.

But is there no quick recreation granted? Ay, that there is.

How you delight, my lords, I know not, I, But, I protest, I love to hear him lie And I will use him for my minstrelsy.

Armado is a most illustrious wight, A man of fire-new words, fashion's own knight.

Costard the swain and he shall be our sport, And so to study, three years is but short.

Which is the duke's own person? This, fellow: what wouldst? I myself reprehend his own person, for I am his grace's tharborough: but I would see his own person in flesh and blood.

There's villany abroad: this letter will tell you more.

How low soever the matter, I hope in God for high words.

A high hope for a low heaven: God grant us patience! To hear? or forbear laughing? To hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately, or to forbear both.

Well, sir, be it as the style shall give us cause to climb in the merriness.

The matter is to me, sir, as concerning Jaquenetta.

Now, sir, for the manner,--it is the manner of a man to speak to a woman: for the form,-- in some form.

For the following, sir? As it shall follow in my correction: and God defend the right! Will you hear this letter with attention? As we would hear an oracle.

Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh.

sole dominator of Navarre, my soul's earth's god, and body's fostering patron.

It may be so: but if he say it is so, he is, in telling true, but so.

Be to me and every man that dares not fight! No words! Of other men's secrets, I beseech you.

melancholy, I did commend the black-oppressing humour to the most wholesome physic of thy health-giving air, and, as I am a gentleman, betook myself to walk.

The time when. About the sixth hour, when beasts most graze, birds best peck, and men sit down to that nourishment which is called supper: so much for the time when.

Now for the ground which, which, I mean, I walked upon: it is y-cleped thy park.

female, or, for thy more sweet understanding, a woman.

called which I apprehended with the aforesaid swain,--I keep her as a vessel of the law's fury, and shall, at the least of thy sweet notice, bring her to trial.

Thine, in all compliments of devoted and heart-burning heat of duty.

This is not so well as I looked for, but the best that ever I heard.

But, sirrah, what say you to this? Sir, I confess the wench.

Did you hear the proclamation? I do confess much of the hearing it but little of the marking of it.

It was proclaimed a year's imprisonment, to be taken with a wench.

I was taken with none, sir: I was taken with a damsel.

This was no damsel, neither, sir, she was a virgin.

It is so varied, too, for it was proclaimed 'virgin.

If it were, I deny her virginity: I was taken with a maid.

Sir, I will pronounce your sentence: you shall fast a week with bran and water.

I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.

My Lord Biron, see him deliver'd o'er: And go we, lords, to put in practise that Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.

I'll lay my head to any good man's hat, These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.

Why, sadness is one and the self-same thing, dear imp.

How canst thou part sadness and melancholy, my tender juvenal? By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough senior.

Why tough senior? why tough senior? Why tender juvenal? why tender juvenal? I spoke it, tender juvenal, as a congruent epitheton appertaining to thy young days, which we may nominate tender.

And I, tough senior, as an appertinent title to your old time, which we may name tough.

How mean you, sir? I pretty, and my saying apt? or I apt, and my saying pretty? Thou pretty, because little.

Speak you this in my praise, master? In thy condign praise.

What, that an eel is ingenious? That an eel is quick.

I do say thou art quick in answers: thou heatest my blood.

I have promised to study three years with the duke.

How many is one thrice told? I am ill at reckoning, it fitteth the spirit of a tapster.

I confess both: they are both the varnish of a complete man.

Then, I am sure, you know how much the gross sum of deuce-ace amounts to.

I will hereupon confess I am in love: and as it is base for a soldier to love, so am I in love with a base wench.

If drawing my sword against the humour of affection would deliver me from the reprobate thought of it, I would take Desire prisoner, and ransom him to any French courtier for a new-devised courtesy.

I think scorn to sigh: methinks I should outswear Cupid.

Comfort, me, boy: what great men have been in love? Hercules, master.

Most sweet Hercules! More authority, dear boy, name more, and, sweet my child, let them be men of good repute and carriage.

Samson, master: he was a man of good carriage, great carriage, for he carried the town-gates on his back like a porter: and he was in love.

O well-knit Samson! strong-jointed Samson! I do excel thee in my rapier as much as thou didst me in carrying gates.

I am in love too. Who was Samson's love, my dear Moth? A woman, master.

Of what complexion? Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the four.

Is that one of the four complexions? As I have read, sir, and the best of them too.

Green indeed is the colour of lovers, but to have a love of that colour, methinks Samson had small reason for it.

He surely affected her for her wit. It was so, sir, for she had a green wit.

Most maculate thoughts, master, are masked under such colours.

A dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of white and red.

I will have that subject newly writ o'er, that I may example my digression by some mighty precedent.

Boy, I do love that country girl that I took in the park with the rational hind Costard: she deserves well.

Sir, the duke's pleasure is, that you keep Costard safe: and you must suffer him to take no delight nor no penance, but a' must fast three days a week.

For this damsel, I must keep her at the park: she is allowed for the day-woman.

Fair weather after you! Come, Jaquenetta, away! Villain, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou be pardoned.

Well, sir, I hope, when I do it, I shall do it on a full stomach.

I am more bound to you than your fellows, for they are but lightly rewarded.

Come, you transgressing slave, away! Let me not be pent up, sir: I will fast, being loose.

No, sir, that were fast and loose: thou shalt to prison.

Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation that I have seen, some shall see.

What shall some see? Nay, nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon.

It is not for prisoners to be too silent in their words, and therefore I will say nothing: I thank God I have as little patience as another man, and therefore I can be quiet.

I do affect the very ground, which is base, where her shoe, which is baser, guided by her foot, which is basest, doth tread.

I shall be forsworn, which is a great argument of falsehood, if I love.

And how can that be true love which is falsely attempted? Love is a familiar, Love is a devil: there is no evil angel but Love.

Yet was Samson so tempted, and he had an excellent strength, yet was Solomon so seduced, and he had a very good wit.

Cupid's butt-shaft is too hard for Hercules' club, and therefore too much odds for a Spaniard's rapier.

The first and second cause will not serve my turn, the passado he respects not, the duello he regards not: his disgrace is to be called boy, but his glory is to subdue men.

Adieu, valour! rust rapier! be still, drum! for your manager is in love, yea, he loveth.

Assist me, some extemporal god of rhyme, for I am sure I shall turn sonnet.

Devise, wit, write, pen, for I am for whole volumes in folio.

Be now as prodigal of all dear grace As Nature was in making graces dear When she did starve the general world beside And prodigally gave them all to you.

Who are the votaries, my loving lords, That are vow-fellows with this virtuous duke? Lord Longaville is one.

Some merry mocking lord, belike, is't so? They say so most that most his humours know.

I saw him at the Duke Alencon's once, And much too little of that good I saw Is my report to his great worthiness.

Another of these students at that time Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.

God bless my ladies! are they all in love, That every one her own hath garnished With such bedecking ornaments of praise? Here comes Boyet.

Re-enter BOYET Now, what admittance, lord? Navarre had notice of your fair approach, And he and his competitors in oath Were all address'd to meet you, gentle lady, Before I came.

Marry, thus much I have learnt: He rather means to lodge you in the field, Like one that comes here to besiege his court, Than seek a dispensation for his oath, To let you enter his unpeopled house.

'Fair' I give you back again, and 'welcome' I have not yet: the roof of this court is too high to be yours, and welcome to the wide fields too base to be mine.

Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise, Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.

I hear your grace hath sworn out house-keeping: Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord, And sin to break it.

I am too sudden-bold: To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.

Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming, And suddenly resolve me in my suit.

You will the sooner, that I were away, For you'll prove perjured if you make me stay.

Did not I dance with you in Brabant once? Did not I dance with you in Brabant once? I know you did.

How needless was it then to ask the question! You must not be so quick.

'Tis 'long of you that spur me with such questions.

Your wit's too hot, it speeds too fast, 'twill tire.

Now fair befall your mask! Fair fall the face it covers! And send you many lovers! Amen, so you be none.

Madam, your father here doth intimate The payment of a hundred thousand crowns, Being but the one half of an entire sum Disbursed by my father in his wars.

If then the king your father will restore But that one half which is unsatisfied, We will give up our right in Aquitaine, And hold fair friendship with his majesty.

Dear Princess, were not his requests so far From reason's yielding, your fair self should make A yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast And go well satisfied to France again.

You do the king my father too much wrong And wrong the reputation of your name, In so unseeming to confess receipt Of that which hath so faithfully been paid.

I do protest I never heard of it, And if you prove it, I'll repay it back Or yield up Aquitaine.

Boyet, you can produce acquittances For such a sum from special officers Of Charles his father.

So please your grace, the packet is not come Where that and other specialties are bound: To-morrow you shall have a sight of them.

It shall suffice me: at which interview All liberal reason I will yield unto.

Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell: To-morrow shall we visit you again.

Sweet health and fair desires consort your grace! Thy own wish wish I thee in every place! Lady, I will commend you to mine own heart.

Pray you, do my commendations, I would be glad to see it.

Will you prick't with your eye? No point, with my knife.

Now, God save thy life! And yours from long living! I cannot stay thanksgiving.

Sir, I pray you, a word: what lady is that same? The heir of Alencon, Katharine her name.

Monsieur, fare you well. I beseech you a word: what is she in the white? A woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.

I desire her name. She hath but one for herself, to desire that were a shame.

Pray you, sir, whose daughter? Her mother's, I have heard.

God's blessing on your beard! Good sir, be not offended.

What's her name in the cap? Rosaline, by good hap.

That last is Biron, the merry madcap lord: Not a word with him but a jest.

And wherefore not ships? No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.

You sheep, and I pasture: shall that finish the jest? So you grant pasture for me.

Offering to kiss her Not so, gentle beast: My lips are no common, though several they be.

Good wits will be jangling, but, gentles, agree: This civil war of wits were much better used On Navarre and his book-men, for here 'tis abused.

If my observation, which very seldom lies, By the heart's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes, Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.

With what? With that which we lovers entitle affected.

I'll give you Aquitaine and all that is his, An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.

But to speak that in words which his eye hath I only have made a mouth of his eye, By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.

Thou art an old love-monger and speakest skilfully.

Then was Venus like her mother, for her father is but grim.

Do you hear, my mad wenches? What then, do you see? Ay, our way to be gone.

LOVE'S LABOURS LOST Warble, child, make passionate my sense of hearing.

Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years, take this key, give enlargement to the swain, bring him festinately hither: I must employ him in a letter to my love.

These are complements, these are humours, these betray nice wenches, that would be betrayed without these, and make them men of note--do you note me?--that most are affected to these.

How hast thou purchased this experience? By my penny of observation.

Callest thou my love 'hobby-horse'? No, master, the hobby-horse is but a colt, and your love perhaps a hackney.

And out of heart, master: all those three I will prove.

And three times as much more, and yet nothing at Fetch hither the swain: he must carry me a letter.

A message well sympathized, a horse to be ambassador for an ass.

Ha, ha! what sayest thou? Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse, for he is very slow-gaited.

But I go. The way is but short: away! As swift as lead, sir.

The meaning, pretty ingenious? Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow? Minime, honest master, or rather, master, no.

You are too swift, sir, to say so: Is that lead slow which is fired from a gun? Sweet smoke of rhetoric! He reputes me a cannon, and the bullet, that's he: I shoot thee at the swain.

A most acute juvenal, voluble and free of grace! By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face: Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.

Re-enter MOTH with COSTARD A wonder, master! here's a costard broken in a shin.

Some enigma, some riddle: come, thy l'envoy, begin.

I will example it: The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee, Were still at odds, being but three.

Say the moral again. The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee, Were still at odds, being but three.

Until the goose came out of door, And stay'd the odds by adding four.

Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with my l'envoy.

The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee, Were still at odds, being but three.

Until the goose came out of door, Staying the odds by adding four.

A good l'envoy, ending in the goose: would you desire more? The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that's flat.

Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.

To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose: Let me see, a fat l'envoy, ay, that's a fat goose.

How did this argument begin? By saying that a costard was broken in a shin.

True, and I for a plantain: thus came your argument in, Then the boy's fat l'envoy, the goose that you bought, And he ended the market.

But tell me, how was there a costard broken in a shin? I will tell you sensibly.

Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth: I will speak that l'envoy: I Costard, running out, that was safely within, Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.

O, marry me to one Frances: I smell some l'envoy, some goose, in this.

By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty, enfreedoming thy person, thou wert immured, restrained, captivated, bound.

True, true, and now you will be my purgation and let me loose.

Signior Costard, adieu. My sweet ounce of man's flesh! my incony Jew! Now will I look to his remuneration.

Remuneration! O, that's the Latin word for three farthings: three farthings--remuneration.

--'No, I'll give you a remuneration:' why, it carries it.

Remuneration! why, it is a fairer name than French crown.

Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man buy for a remuneration? What is a remuneration? Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.

I thank your worship: God be wi' you! Stay, slave, I must employ thee: As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave, Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.

There's thy guerdon, go. Giving him a shilling Gardon, O sweet gardon! better than remuneration, a'leven-pence farthing better: most sweet gardon! I will do it sir, in print.

Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue and groan: Some men must love my lady and some Joan.

LOVE'S LABOURS LOST Was that the king, that spurred his horse so hard Against the steep uprising of the hill? I know not, but I think it was not he.

Well, lords, to-day we shall have our dispatch: On Saturday we will return to France.

Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush That we must stand and play the murderer in? Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice, A stand where you may make the fairest shoot.

I thank my beauty, I am fair that shoot, And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot.

What, what? first praise me and again say no? O short-lived pride! Not fair? alack for woe! Yes, madam, fair.

Nay, never paint me now: Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.

Here, good my glass, take this for telling true: Fair payment for foul words is more than due.

See see, my beauty will be saved by merit! O heresy in fair, fit for these days! A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.

But come, the bow: now mercy goes to kill, And shooting well is then accounted ill.

Thus will I save my credit in the shoot: Not wounding, pity would not let me do't, If wounding, then it was to show my skill, That more for praise than purpose meant to kill.

Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty Only for praise sake, when they strive to be Lords o'er their lords? Only for praise: and praise we may afford To any lady that subdues a lord.

God dig-you-den all! Pray you, which is the head lady? Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that have no heads.

Which is the greatest lady, the highest? The thickest and the tallest.

The thickest and the tallest! it is so, truth is truth.

An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit, One o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit.

Are not you the chief woman? you are the thickest here.

What's your will, sir? what's your will? I have a letter from Monsieur Biron to one Lady Rosaline.

O, thy letter, thy letter! he's a good friend of mine: Stand aside, good bearer.

This letter is mistook, it importeth none here, It is writ to Jaquenetta.

Break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.

'By heaven, that thou art fair, is most infallible, true, that thou art beauteous, truth itself, that thou art lovely.

Who came? the king: why did he come? to see: why did he see? to overcome: to whom came he? to the beggar: what saw he? the beggar: who overcame he? the beggar.

The conclusion is victory: on whose side? the king's.

The captive is enriched: on whose side? the beggar's.

The catastrophe is a nuptial: on whose side? the king's: no, on both in one, or one in both.

I am the king, for so stands the comparison: thou the beggar, for so witnesseth thy lowliness.

Shall I command thy love? I may: shall I enforce thy love? I could: shall I entreat thy love? I will.

What shalt thou exchange for rags? robes, for tittles? titles, for thyself? me.

Thus, expecting thy reply, I profane my lips on thy foot, my eyes on thy picture.

Thine, in the dearest design of industry, DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.

Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar 'Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey.

Submissive fall his princely feet before, And he from forage will incline to play: But if thou strive, poor soul, what art thou then? Food for his rage, repasture for his den.

What plume of feathers is he that indited this letter? What vane? what weathercock? did you ever hear better? I am much deceived but I remember the style.

This Armado is a Spaniard, that keeps here in court, A phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport To the prince and his bookmates.

Thou fellow, a word: Who gave thee this letter? I told you, my lord.

To whom shouldst thou give it? From my lord to my lady.

From which lord to which lady? From my lord Biron, a good master of mine, To a lady of France that he call'd Rosaline.

Come, lords, away. To ROSALINE Here, sweet, put up this: 'twill be thine another day.

Who is the suitor? who is the suitor? Shall I teach you to know? Ay, my continent of beauty.

Finely put off! My lady goes to kill horns, but, if thou marry, Hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.

And who is your deer? If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.

Finely put on, indeed! You still wrangle with her, Boyet, and she strikes at the brow.

Thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it, Thou canst not hit it, my good man.

An I cannot, cannot, cannot, An I cannot, another can.

By my troth, most pleasant: how both did fit it! A mark marvellous well shot, for they both did hit it.

A mark! O, mark but that mark! A mark, says my lady! Let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.

Indeed, a' must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the clout.

An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.

Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.

Come, come, you talk greasily, your lips grow foul.

She's too hard for you at pricks, sir: challenge her to bowl.

Truly, Master Holofernes, the epithets are sweetly varied, like a scholar at the least: but, sir, I assure ye, it was a buck of the first head.

I said the deer was not a haud credo, twas a pricket.

You two are book-men: can you tell me by your wit What was a month old at Cain's birth, that's not five weeks old as yet? Dictynna, goodman Dull, Dictynna, goodman Dull.

What is Dictynna? A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.

The moon was a month old when Adam was no more, And raught not to five weeks when he came to The allusion holds in the exchange.

'Tis true indeed, the collusion holds in the exchange.

God comfort thy capacity! I say, the allusion holds in the exchange.

And I say, the pollusion holds in the exchange, for the moon is never but a month old: and I say beside that, 'twas a pricket that the princess killed.

Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporal epitaph on the death of the deer? And, to humour the ignorant, call I the deer the princess killed a pricket.

Perge, good Master Holofernes, perge, so it shall please you to abrogate scurrility.

I will something affect the letter, for it argues facility.

The preyful princess pierced and prick'd a pretty pleasing pricket, Some say a sore, but not a sore, till now made sore with shooting.

The dogs did yell: put L to sore, then sorel jumps from thicket, Or pricket sore, or else sorel, the people fall a-hooting.

If sore be sore, then L to sore makes fifty sores one sorel.

Of one sore I an hundred make by adding but one more L.

But the gift is good in those in whom it is acute, and I am thankful for it.

Sir, I praise the Lord for you, and so may my parishioners, for their sons are well tutored by you, and their daughters profit very greatly under you: you are a good member of the commonwealth.

Mehercle, if their sons be ingenuous, they shall want no instruction, if their daughters be capable, I will put it to them: but vir sapit qui pauca loquitur, a soul feminine saluteth us.

An if one should be pierced, which is the one? Marry, master schoolmaster, he that is likest to a hogshead.

Piercing a hogshead! a good lustre of conceit in a tuft of earth, fire enough for a flint, pearl enough for a swine: 'tis pretty, it is well.

Good master Parson, be so good as read me this letter: it was given me by Costard, and sent me from Don Armado: I beseech you, read it.

Fauste, precor gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra Ruminat,--and so forth.

Ah, good old Mantuan! I may speak of thee as the traveller doth of Venice, Venetia, Venetia, Chi non ti vede non ti pretia.

Old Mantuan, old Mantuan! who understandeth thee not, loves thee not.

Ut, re, sol, la, mi, fa. Under pardon, sir, what are the contents? or rather, as Horace says in his--What, my soul, verses? Ay, sir, and very learned.

Let me hear a staff, a stanze, a verse, lege, domine.

Celestial as thou art, O, pardon, love, this wrong, That sings heaven's praise with such an earthly tongue.

You find not the apostraphas, and so miss the accent: let me supervise the canzonet.

Here are only numbers ratified, but, for the elegancy, facility, and golden cadence of poesy, caret.

But, damosella virgin, was this directed to you? Ay, sir, from one Monsieur Biron, one of the strange queen's lords.

I will overglance the superscript: 'To the snow-white hand of the most beauteous Lady Rosaline.

I will look again on the intellect of the letter, for the nomination of the party writing to the person written unto: 'Your ladyship's in all desired employment, BIRON.

Trip and go, my sweet, deliver this paper into the royal hand of the king: it may concern much.

Stay not thy compliment, I forgive thy duty, adieu.

Sir, you have done this in the fear of God, very religiously, and, as a certain father saith,-- Sir tell me not of the father, I do fear colourable colours.

But to return to the verses: did they please you, Sir Nathaniel? Marvellous well for the pen.

And thank you too, for society, saith the text, is the happiness of life.

And, certes, the text most infallibly concludes it.

To DULL Sir, I do invite you too, you shall not say me nay: pauca verba.

Away! the gentles are at their game, and we will to our recreation.

LOVE'S LABOURS LOST The king he is hunting the deer, I am coursing myself: they have pitched a toil, I am toiling in a pitch,--pitch that defiles: defile! a foul word.

O, but her eye,--by this light, but for her eye, I would not love her, yes, for her two eyes.

Well, I do nothing in the world but lie, and lie in my throat.

By heaven, I do love: and it hath taught me to rhyme and to be melancholy, and here is part of my rhyme, and here my melancholy.

Here comes one with a paper: God give him grace to groan! Stands aside Ay me! thou hast thumped him with thy bird-bolt under the left pap.

Do but behold the tears that swell in me, And they thy glory through my grief will show: But do not love thyself, then thou wilt keep My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.

O queen of queens! how far dost thou excel, No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell.

How shall she know my griefs? I'll drop the paper: Sweet leaves, shade folly.

Who is he comes here? Steps aside What, Longaville! and reading! listen, ear.

Now, in thy likeness, one more fool appear! Ay me, I am forsworn! Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers.

In love, I hope: sweet fellowship in shame! One drunkard loves another of the name.

Am I the first that have been perjured so? I could put thee in comfort.

Not by two that I know: Thou makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of society, The shape of Love's Tyburn that hangs up simplicity.

I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move: O sweet Maria, empress of my love! These numbers will I tear, and write in prose.

O, rhymes are guards on wanton Cupid's hose: Disfigure not his slop.

Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye, 'Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument, Persuade my heart to this false perjury? Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.

A woman I forswore, but I will prove, Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee: My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love, Thy grace being gain'd cures all disgrace in me.

God amend us, God amend! we are much out o' the way.

O that I had my wish! And I had mine! And I mine too, good Lord! Amen, so I had mine: is not that a good word? I would forget her, but a fever she Reigns in my blood and will remember'd be.

A fever in your blood! why, then incision Would let her out in saucers: sweet misprision! Once more I'll read the ode that I have writ.

This will I send, and something else more plain, That shall express my true love's fasting pain.

O, would the king, Biron, and Longaville, Were lovers too! Ill, to example ill, Would from my forehead wipe a perjured note, For none offend where all alike do dote.

You may look pale, but I should blush, I know, To be o'erheard and taken napping so.

You chide at him, offending twice as much, You do not love Maria, Longaville Did never sonnet for her sake compile, Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart His loving bosom to keep down his heart.

God bless the king! What present hast thou there? Some certain treason.

What makes treason here? Nay, it makes nothing, sir.

If it mar nothing neither, The treason and you go in peace away together.

I beseech your grace, let this letter be read: Our parson misdoubts it, 'twas treason, he said.

Giving him the paper Where hadst thou it? Of Costard.

Where hadst thou it? Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.

BIRON tears the letter How now! what is in you? why dost thou tear it? A toy, my liege, a toy: your grace needs not fear it.

It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear it.

That you three fools lack'd me fool to make up the mess: He, he, and you, and you, my liege, and I, Are pick-purses in love, and we deserve to die.

O, dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more.

Will these turtles be gone? Hence, sirs, away! Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.

Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues,-- Fie, painted rhetoric! O, she needs it not: To things of sale a seller's praise belongs, She passes praise, then praise too short doth blot.

Is ebony like her? O wood divine! A wife of such wood were felicity.

O, who can give an oath? where is a book? That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack, If that she learn not of her eye to look: No face is fair that is not full so black.

O paradox! Black is the badge of hell, The hue of dungeons and the suit of night, And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well.

Devils soonest tempt, resembling spirits of light.

O, if in black my lady's brows be deck'd, It mourns that painting and usurping hair Should ravish doters with a false aspect, And therefore is she born to make black fair.

Her favour turns the fashion of the days, For native blood is counted painting now, And therefore red, that would avoid dispraise, Paints itself black, to imitate her brow.

Your mistresses dare never come in rain, For fear their colours should be wash'd away.

'Twere good, yours did, for, sir, to tell you plain, I'll find a fairer face not wash'd to-day.

O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes, Her feet were much too dainty for such tread! O, vile! then, as she goes, what upward lies The street should see as she walk'd overhead.

But what of this? are we not all in love? Nothing so sure, and thereby all forsworn.

Then leave this chat, and, good Biron, now prove Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.

O, some authority how to proceed, Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil.

Consider what you first did swear unto, To fast, to study, and to see no woman, Flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth.

Say, can you fast? your stomachs are too young, And abstinence engenders maladies.

Never durst poet touch a pen to write Until his ink were temper'd with Love's sighs, O, then his lines would ravish savage ears And plant in tyrants mild humility.

Then fools you were these women to forswear, Or keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools.

Now to plain-dealing, lay these glozes by: Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France? And win them too: therefore let us devise Some entertainment for them in their tents.

Away, away! no time shall be omitted That will betime, and may by us be fitted.

Allons! allons! Sow'd cockle reap'd no corn, And justice always whirls in equal measure: Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn, If so, our copper buys no better treasure.

I did converse this quondam day with a companion of the king's, who is intituled, nomi- nated, or called, Don Adriano de Armado.

Novi hominem tanquam te: his humour is lofty, his discourse peremptory, his tongue filed, his eye ambitious, his gait majestical, and his general behavior vain, ridiculous, and thrasonical.

He is too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd, as it were, too peregrinate, as I may call it.

Draws out his table-book He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer than the staple of his argument.

This is abhominable,--which he would call abbominable: it insinuateth me of insanie: anne intelligis, domine? to make frantic, lunatic.

Bon, bon, fort bon, Priscian! a little scratch'd, 'twill serve.

To MOTH Quare chirrah, not sirrah? Men of peace, well encountered.

O, they have lived long on the alms-basket of words.

I marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word, for thou art not so long by the head as honorificabilitudinitatibus: thou art easier swallowed than a flap-dragon.

What is a, b, spelt backward, with the horn on his head? Ba, pueritia, with a horn added.

You hear his learning. Quis, quis, thou consonant? The third of the five vowels, if you repeat them, or the fifth, if I.

I will repeat them,--a, e, i,-- The sheep: the other two concludes it,--o, u.

Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweet touch, a quick venue of wit! snip, snap, quick and home! it rejoiceth my intellect: true wit! Offered by a child to an old man, which is wit-old.

What is the figure? what is the figure? Thou disputest like an infant: go, whip thy gig.

Lend me your horn to make one, and I will whip about your infamy circum circa,--a gig of a cuckold's horn.

An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst have it to buy gingerbread: hold, there is the very remuneration I had of thy master, thou halfpenny purse of wit, thou pigeon-egg of discretion.

O, an the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but my bastard, what a joyful father wouldst thou make me! Go to, thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers' ends, as they say.

Arts-man, preambulate, we will be singled from the barbarous.

Do you not educate youth at the charge-house on the top of the mountain? Or mons, the hill.

Sir, it is the king's most sweet pleasure and affection to congratulate the princess at her pavilion in the posteriors of this day, which the rude multitude call the afternoon.

The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is liable, congruent and measurable for the afternoon: the word is well culled, chose, sweet and apt, I do assure you, sir, I do assure.

Sir, the king is a noble gentleman, and my familiar, I do assure ye, very good friend: for what is inward between us, let it pass.

By the world, I recount no fable: some certain special honours it pleaseth his greatness to impart to Armado, a soldier, a man of travel, that hath seen the world, but let that pass.

Now, understanding that the curate and your sweet self are good at such eruptions and sudden breaking out of mirth, as it were, I have acquainted you withal, to the end to crave your assistance.

Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies.

Shall I have audience? he shall present Hercules in minority: his enter and exit shall be strangling a snake, and I will have an apology for that purpose.

An excellent device! so, if any of the audience hiss, you may cry 'Well done, Hercules! now thou crushest the snake!' that is the way to make an offence gracious, though few have the grace to do it.

For the rest of the Worthies?-- I will play three myself.

Thrice-worthy gentleman! Shall I tell you a thing? We attend.

Via, goodman Dull! thou hast spoken no word all this while.

I'll make one in a dance, or so, or I will play On the tabour to the Worthies, and let them dance the hay.

That was the way to make his godhead wax, For he hath been five thousand years a boy.

You'll ne'er be friends with him, a' kill'd your sister.

What's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word? A light condition in a beauty dark.

You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff, Therefore I'll darkly end the argument.

But Rosaline, you have a favour too: Who sent it? and what is it? I would you knew: An if my face were but as fair as yours, My favour were as great, be witness this.

Nay, I have verses too, I thank Biron: The numbers true, and, were the numbering too, I were the fairest goddess on the ground: I am compared to twenty thousand fairs.

O, he hath drawn my picture in his letter! Any thing like? Much in the letters, nothing in the praise.

'Ware pencils, ho! let me not die your debtor, My red dominical, my golden letter: O, that your face were not so full of O's! A pox of that jest! and I beshrew all shrows.

But, Katharine, what was sent to you from fair Dumain? Madam, this glove.

Did he not send you twain? Yes, madam, and moreover Some thousand verses of a faithful lover, A huge translation of hypocrisy, Vilely compiled, profound simplicity.

This and these pearls to me sent Longaville: The letter is too long by half a mile.

Dost thou not wish in heart The chain were longer and the letter short? Ay, or I would these hands might never part.

None are so surely caught, when they are catch'd, As wit turn'd fool: folly, in wisdom hatch'd, Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school And wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.

The blood of youth burns not with such excess As gravity's revolt to wantonness.

Folly in fools bears not so strong a note As foolery in the wise, when wit doth dote, Since all the power thereof it doth apply To prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.

Saint Denis to Saint Cupid! What are they That charge their breath against us? say, scout, say.

The boy replied, 'An angel is not evil, I should have fear'd her had she been a devil.

With that, they all did tumble on the ground, With such a zealous laughter, so profound, That in this spleen ridiculous appears, To cheque their folly, passion's solemn tears.

But what, but what, come they to visit us? They do, they do: and are apparell'd thus.

Their purpose is to parle, to court and dance, And every one his love-feat will advance Unto his several mistress, which they'll know By favours several which they did bestow.

And will they so? the gallants shall be task'd, For, ladies, we shall every one be mask'd, And not a man of them shall have the grace, Despite of suit, to see a lady's face.

Hold, Rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear, And then the king will court thee for his dear, Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine, So shall Biron take me for Rosaline.

And change your favours too, so shall your loves Woo contrary, deceived by these removes.

But in this changing what is your intent? The effect of my intent is to cross theirs: They do it but in mocking merriment, And mock for mock is only my intent.

Their several counsels they unbosom shall To loves mistook, and so be mock'd withal Upon the next occasion that we meet, With visages displayed, to talk and greet.

But shall we dance, if they desire to't? No, to the death, we will not move a foot, Nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace, But while 'tis spoke each turn away her face.

Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart, And quite divorce his memory from his part.

Trumpets sound within The trumpet sounds: be mask'd, the maskers come.

The Ladies mask All hail, the richest beauties on the earth!-- Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.

The Ladies turn their backs to him That ever turn'd their--backs--to mortal views! That ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views!--Out-- True, out indeed.

What would you with the princess? Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.

What would they, say they? Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.

Say to her, we have measured many miles To tread a measure with her on this grass.

They say, that they have measured many a mile To tread a measure with you on this grass.

Ask them how many inches Is in one mile: if they have measured many, The measure then of one is easily told.

If to come hither you have measured miles, And many miles, the princess bids you tell How many inches doth fill up one mile.

Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face, That we, like savages, may worship it.

Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do! Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine, Those clouds removed, upon our watery eyne.

O vain petitioner! beg a greater matter, Thou now request'st but moonshine in the water.

Music plays Not yet! no dance! Thus change I like the moon.

Will you not dance? How come you thus estranged? You took the moon at full, but now she's changed.

Since you are strangers and come here by chance, We'll not be nice: take hands.

We will not dance. Why take we hands, then? Only to part friends: Curtsy, sweet hearts, and so the measure ends.

Prize you yourselves: what buys your company? Your absence only.

Then cannot we be bought: and so, adieu, Twice to your visor, and half once to you.

They converse apart White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee.

Nay then, two treys, and if you grow so nice, Metheglin, wort, and malmsey: well run, dice! There's half-a-dozen sweets.

Seventh sweet, adieu: Since you can cog, I'll play no more with you.

They converse apart Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word? Name it.

Fair lady,-- Say you so? Fair lord,-- Take that for your fair lady.

Please it you, As much in private, and I'll bid adieu.

They converse apart What, was your vizard made without a tongue? I know the reason, lady, why you ask.

You have a double tongue within your mask, And would afford my speechless vizard half.

Is not 'veal' a calf? A calf, fair lady! No, a fair lord calf.

No, I'll not be your half Take all, and wean it, it may prove an ox.

Look, how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks! Will you give horns, chaste lady? do not so.

Not one word more, my maids, break off, break off.

By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff! Farewell, mad wenches, you have simple wits.

Are these the breed of wits so wonder'd at? Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puff'd out.

Well-liking wits they have, gross, gross, fat, fat.

O poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout! Will they not, think you, hang themselves tonight? Or ever, but in vizards, show their faces? This pert Biron was out of countenance quite.

O, they were all in lamentable cases! The king was weeping-ripe for a good word.

Dumain was at my service, and his sword: No point, quoth I, my servant straight was mute.

Lord Longaville said, I came o'er his heart, And trow you what he called me? Qualm, perhaps.

Go, sickness as thou art! Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.

Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear: Immediately they will again be here In their own shapes, for it can never be They will digest this harsh indignity.

Will they return? They will, they will, God knows, And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows: Therefore change favours, and, when they repair, Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.

Fair ladies mask'd are roses in their bud, Dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shown, Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.

Re-enter FERDINAND, BIRON, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN, in their proper habits Fair sir, God save you! Where's the princess? Gone to her tent.

Please it your majesty Command me any service to her thither? That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.

We came to visit you, and purpose now To lead you to our court, vouchsafe it then.

This field shall hold me, and so hold your vow: Nor God, nor I, delights in perjured men.

Rebuke me not for that which you provoke: The virtue of your eye must break my oath.

You nickname virtue, vice you should have spoke, For virtue's office never breaks men's troth.

O, you have lived in desolation here, Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.

Not so, my lord, it is not so, I swear, We have had pastimes here and pleasant game: A mess of Russians left us but of late.

How, madam! Russians! Ay, in truth, my lord, Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.

It is not so, my lord: My lady, to the manner of the days, In courtesy gives undeserving praise.

We four indeed confronted were with four In Russian habit: here they stay'd an hour, And talk'd apace, and in that hour, my lord, They did not bless us with one happy word.

I dare not call them fools, but this I think, When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.

This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye,-- I am a fool, and full of poverty.

But that you take what doth to you belong, It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.

O, I am yours, and all that I possess! All the fool mine? I cannot give you less.

Which of the vizards was it that you wore? Where? when? what vizard? why demand you this? There, then, that vizard, that superfluous case That hid the worse and show'd the better face.

Amazed, my lord? why looks your highness sad? Help, hold his brows! he'll swoon! Why look you pale? Sea-sick, I think, coming from Muscovy.

Yet I have a trick Of the old rage: bear with me, I am sick, I'll leave it by degrees.

It is not so, for how can this be true, That you stand forfeit, being those that sue? Peace! for I will not have to do with you.

Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression Some fair excuse.

Were not you here but even now disguised? Madam, I was.

When you then were here, What did you whisper in your lady's ear? That more than all the world I did respect her.

When she shall challenge this, you will reject her.

Peace, peace! forbear: Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.

God give thee joy of him! the noble lord Most honourably doth unhold his word.

What mean you, madam? by my life, my troth, I never swore this lady such an oath.

By heaven, you did, and to confirm it plain, You gave me this: but take it, sir, again.

My faith and this the princess I did give: I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.

Pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear, And Lord Biron, I thank him, is my dear.

What, will you have me, or your pearl again? Neither of either, I remit both twain.

Now, to our perjury to add more terror, We are again forsworn, in will and error.

You leer upon me, do you? there's an eye Wounds like a leaden sword.

Full merrily Hath this brave manage, this career, been run.

O Lord, sir, they would know Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no.

What, are there but three? No, sir, but it is vara fine, For every one pursents three.

Not so, sir, under correction, sir, I hope it is not so.

You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir we know what we know: I hope, sir, three times thrice, sir,-- Is not nine.

Under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth amount.

O Lord, sir, it were pity you should get your living by reckoning, sir.

Art thou one of the Worthies? It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompion the Great: for mine own part, I know not the degree of the Worthy, but I am to stand for him.

We will turn it finely off, sir, we will take some care.

We are shame-proof, my lord: and tis some policy To have one show worse than the king's and his company.

Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royal sweet breath as will utter a brace of words.

Converses apart with FERDINAND, and delivers him a paper Doth this man serve God? Why ask you? He speaks not like a man of God's making.

That is all one, my fair, sweet, honey monarch, for, I protest, the schoolmaster is exceeding fantastical, too, too vain, too too vain: but we will put it, as they say, to fortuna de la guerra.

I wish you the peace of mind, most royal couplement! Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies.

The pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fool and the boy:-- Abate throw at novum, and the whole world again Cannot pick out five such, take each one in his vein.

Well said, old mocker: I must needs be friends with thee.

'Tis not so much worth, but I hope I was perfect: I made a little fault in 'Great.

My hat to a halfpenny, Pompey proves the best Worthy.

Your nose smells 'no' in this, most tender-smelling knight.

Proceed, good Alexander. When in the world I lived, I was the world's Most true, 'tis right, you were so, Alisander.

Alisander the conqueror! You will be scraped out of the painted cloth for this: your lion, that holds his poll-axe sitting on a close-stool, will be given to Ajax: he will be the ninth Worthy.

A conqueror, and afeard to speak! run away for shame, Alisander.

SIR NATHANIEL retires There, an't shall please you, a foolish mild man, an honest man, look you, and soon dashed.

He is a marvellous good neighbour, faith, and a very good bowler: but, for Alisander,--alas, you see how 'tis,--a little o'erparted.

But there are Worthies a-coming will speak their mind in some other sort.

Great Hercules is presented by this imp, Whose club kill'd Cerberus, that three-headed canis, And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp, Thus did he strangle serpents in his manus.

Quoniam he seemeth in minority, Ergo I come with this apology.

MOTH retires Judas I am,-- A Judas! Not Iscariot, sir.

How art thou proved Judas? Judas I am,-- The more shame for you, Judas.

And now forward, for we have put thee in countenance.

And so adieu, sweet Jude! nay, why dost thou stay? For the latter end of his name.

For the ass to the Jude, give it him:--Jud-as, away! This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.

A light for Monsieur Judas! it grows dark, he may stumble.

HOLOFERNES retires Alas, poor Maccabaeus, how hath he been baited! Hide thy head, Achilles: here comes Hector in arms.

Though my mocks come home by me, I will now be merry.

But is this Hector? I think Hector was not so clean-timbered.

The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty, Gave Hector a gift,-- A gilt nutmeg.

The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion, A man so breathed, that certain he would fight, yea From morn till night, out of his pavilion.

I must rather give it the rein, for it runs against Hector.

The sweet war-man is dead and rotten, sweet chucks, beat not the bones of the buried: when he breathed, he was a man.

But I will forward with my device. To the PRINCESS Sweet royalty, bestow on me the sense of hearing.

This Hector far surmounted Hannibal,-- The party is gone, fellow Hector, she is gone, she is two months on her way.

What meanest thou? Faith, unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor wench is cast away: she's quick, the child brags in her belly already: tis yours.

More Ates, more Ates! stir them on! stir them on! Hector will challenge him.

Ay, if a' have no man's blood in's belly than will sup a flea.

I will not fight with a pole, like a northern man: I'll slash, I'll do it by the sword.

Room for the incensed Worthies! I'll do it in my shirt.

Most resolute Pompey! Master, let me take you a buttonhole lower.

Do you not see Pompey is uncasing for the combat? What mean you? You will lose your reputation.

Gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me, I will not combat in my shirt.

You may not deny it: Pompey hath made the challenge.

What reason have you for't? The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt, I go woolward for penance.

True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want of linen: since when, I'll be sworn, he wore none but a dishclout of Jaquenetta's, and that a' wears next his heart for a favour.

God save you, madam! Welcome, Mercade, But that thou interrupt'st our merriment.

I am sorry, madam, for the news I bring Is heavy in my tongue.

The king your father-- Dead, for my life! Even so, my tale is told.

I have seen the day of wrong through the little hole of discretion, and I will right myself like a soldier.

How fares your majesty? Boyet, prepare, I will away tonight.

Farewell worthy lord! A heavy heart bears not a nimble tongue: Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks For my great suit so easily obtain'd.

Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief, And by these badges understand the king.

Now, at the latest minute of the hour, Grant us your loves.

A time, methinks, too short To make a world-without-end bargain in.

If this thou do deny, let our hands part, Neither entitled in the other's heart.

If this, or more than this, I would deny, To flatter up these powers of mine with rest, The sudden hand of death close up mine eye! Hence ever then my heart is in thy breast.

But what to me, my love? but what to me? A wife? A beard, fair health, and honesty, With three-fold love I wish you all these three.

What says Maria? At the twelvemonth's end I'll change my black gown for a faithful friend.

Studies my lady? mistress, look on me, Behold the window of my heart, mine eye, What humble suit attends thy answer there: Impose some service on me for thy love.

To move wild laughter in the throat of death? It cannot be, it is impossible: Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.

A twelvemonth! well, befall what will befall, I'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.

Our wooing doth not end like an old play, Jack hath not Jill: these ladies' courtesy Might well have made our sport a comedy.

Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth and a day, And then 'twill end.

Re-enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO Sweet majesty, vouchsafe me,-- Was not that Hector? The worthy knight of Troy.

I am a votary, I have vowed to Jaquenetta to hold the plough for her sweet love three years.

But, most esteemed greatness, will you hear the dialogue that the two learned men have compiled in praise of the owl and the cuckoo? It should have followed in the end of our show.

Re-enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, MOTH, COSTARD, and others This side is Hiems, Winter, this Ver, the Spring, the one maintained by the owl, the other by the cuckoo.

The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of Apollo.

Enter three Witches When shall we three meet again In thunder, lightning, or in rain? When the hurlyburly's done, When the battle's lost and won.

Fair is foul, and foul is fair: Hover through the fog and filthy air.

Enter DUNCAN, MALCOLM, DONALBAIN, LENNOX, with Attendants, meeting a bleeding Sergeant What bloody man is that? He can report, As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt The newest state.

This is the sergeant Who like a good and hardy soldier fought 'Gainst my captivity.

Hail, brave friend! Say to the king the knowledge of the broil As thou didst leave it.

Doubtful it stood, As two spent swimmers, that do cling together And choke their art.

O valiant cousin! worthy gentleman! As whence the sun 'gins his reflection Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break, So from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come Discomfort swells.

Dismay'd not this Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo? As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.

So well thy words become thee as thy wounds, They smack of honour both.

Go get him surgeons. Who comes here? The worthy thane of Ross.

What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he look That seems to speak things strange.

God save the king! Whence camest thou, worthy thane? From Fife, great king, Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky And fan our people cold.

Curbing his lavish spirit: and, to conclude, The victory fell on us.

Great happiness! That now Sweno, the Norways' king, craves composition: Nor would we deign him burial of his men Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's inch Ten thousand dollars to our general use.

No more that thane of Cawdor shall deceive Our bosom interest: go pronounce his present death, And with his former title greet Macbeth.

Enter the three Witches Where hast thou been, sister? Killing swine.

Sister, where thou? A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap, And munch'd, and munch'd, and munch'd:-- 'Give me,' quoth I: 'Aroint thee, witch!' the rump-fed ronyon cries.

Her husband's to Aleppo gone, master o' the Tiger: But in a sieve I'll thither sail, And, like a rat without a tail, I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do.

I myself have all the other, And the very ports they blow, All the quarters that they know I' the shipman's card.

Here I have a pilot's thumb, Wreck'd as homeward he did come.

The weird sisters, hand in hand, Posters of the sea and land, Thus do go about, about: Thrice to thine and thrice to mine And thrice again, to make up nine.

If you can look into the seeds of time, And say which grain will grow and which will not, Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear Your favours nor your hate.

Say from whence You owe this strange intelligence? or why Upon this blasted heath you stop our way With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you.

Witches vanish The earth hath bubbles, as the water has, And these are of them.

Whither are they vanish'd? Into the air, and what seem'd corporal melted As breath into the wind.

Would they had stay'd! Were such things here as we do speak about? Or have we eaten on the insane root That takes the reason prisoner? Your children shall be kings.

And thane of Cawdor too: went it not so? To the selfsame tune and words.

As thick as hail Came post with post, and every one did bear Thy praises in his kingdom's great defence, And pour'd them down before him.

We are sent To give thee from our royal master thanks, Only to herald thee into his sight, Not pay thee.

And, for an earnest of a greater honour, He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor: In which addition, hail, most worthy thane! For it is thine.

What, can the devil speak true? The thane of Cawdor lives: why do you dress me In borrow'd robes? Who was the thane lives yet, But under heavy judgment bears that life Which he deserves to lose.

But 'tis strange: And oftentimes, to win us to our harm, The instruments of darkness tell us truths, Win us with honest trifles, to betray's In deepest consequence.

As happy prologues to the swelling act Of the imperial theme.

New horrors come upon him, Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mould But with the aid of use.

Give me your favour: my dull brain was wrought With things forgotten.

Kind gentlemen, your pains Are register'd where every day I turn The leaf to read them.

Let us toward the king. Think upon what hath chanced, and, at more time, The interim having weigh'd it, let us speak Our free hearts each to other.

Enter DUNCAN, MALCOLM, DONALBAIN, LENNOX, and Attendants Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not Those in commission yet return'd? My liege, They are not yet come back.

There's no art To find the mind's construction in the face: He was a gentleman on whom I built An absolute trust.

O worthiest cousin! The sin of my ingratitude even now Was heavy on me: thou art so far before That swiftest wing of recompense is slow To overtake thee.

Would thou hadst less deserved, That the proportion both of thanks and payment Might have been mine! only I have left to say, More is thy due than more than all can pay.

The service and the loyalty I owe, In doing it, pays itself.

Your highness' part Is to receive our duties, and our duties Are to your throne and state children and servants, Which do but what they should, by doing every thing Safe toward your love and honour.

Welcome hither: I have begun to plant thee, and will labour To make thee full of growing.

Noble Banquo, That hast no less deserved, nor must be known No less to have done so, let me enfold thee And hold thee to my heart.

My plenteous joys, Wanton in fulness, seek to hide themselves In drops of sorrow.

From hence to Inverness, And bind us further to you.

The rest is labour, which is not used for you: I'll be myself the harbinger and make joyful The hearing of my wife with your approach, So humbly take my leave.

My worthy Cawdor! On which I must fall down, or else o'erleap, For in my way it lies.

Stars, hide your fires, Let not light see my black and deep desires: The eye wink at the hand, yet let that be, Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.

True, worthy Banquo, he is full so valiant, And in his commendations I am fed, It is a banquet to me.

Let's after him, Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome: It is a peerless kinsman.

Exeunt 'They met me in the day of success: and I have learned by the perfectest report, they have more in them than mortal knowledge.

When I burned in desire to question them further, they made themselves air, into which they vanished.

What is your tidings? The king comes here to-night.

Thou'rt mad to say it: Is not thy master with him? who, were't so, Would have inform'd for preparation.

So please you, it is true: our thane is coming: One of my fellows had the speed of him, Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more Than would make up his message.

The raven himself is hoarse That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan Under my battlements.

O, never Shall sun that morrow see! Your face, my thane, is as a book where men May read strange matters.

To beguile the time, Look like the time, bear welcome in your eye, Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower, But be the serpent under't.

He that's coming Must be provided for: and you shall put This night's great business into my dispatch, Which shall to all our nights and days to come Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.

Only look up clear, To alter favour ever is to fear: Leave all the rest to me.

Enter DUNCAN, MALCOLM,  DONALBAIN, BANQUO, LENNOX, MACDUFF, ROSS, ANGUS, and Attendants This castle hath a pleasant seat, the air Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself Unto our gentle senses.

See, see, our honour'd hostess! The love that follows us sometime is our trouble, Which still we thank as love.

Herein I teach you How you shall bid God 'ild us for your pains, And thank us for your trouble.

Where's the thane of Cawdor? We coursed him at the heels, and had a purpose To be his purveyor: but he rides well, And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him To his home before us.

Fair and noble hostess, We are your guest to-night.

Your servants ever Have theirs, themselves and what is theirs, in compt, To make their audit at your highness' pleasure, Still to return your own.

Give me your hand, Conduct me to mine host: we love him highly, And shall continue our graces towards him.

He's here in double trust, First, as I am his kinsman and his subject, Strong both against the deed, then, as his host, Who should against his murderer shut the door, Not bear the knife myself.

I have no spur To prick the sides of my intent, but only Vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself And falls on the other.

Was the hope drunk Wherein you dress'd yourself? hath it slept since? And wakes it now, to look so green and pale At what it did so freely? From this time Such I account thy love.

What beast was't, then, That made you break this enterprise to me? When you durst do it, then you were a man, And, to be more than what you were, you would Be so much more the man.

Nor time nor place Did then adhere, and yet you would make both: They have made themselves, and that their fitness now Does unmake you.

If we should fail? We fail! But screw your courage to the sticking-place, And we'll not fail.

Away, and mock the time with fairest show: False face must hide what the false heart doth know.

How goes the night, boy? The moon is down, I have not heard the clock.

There's husbandry in heaven, Their candles are all out.

Take thee that too. A heavy summons lies like lead upon me, And yet I would not sleep: merciful powers, Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature Gives way to in repose! Give me my sword.

What, sir, not yet at rest? The king's a-bed: He hath been in unusual pleasure, and Sent forth great largess to your offices.

This diamond he greets your wife withal, By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up In measureless content.

Being unprepared, Our will became the servant to defect, Which else should free have wrought.

I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters: To you they have show'd some truth.

I think not of them: Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve, We would spend it in some words upon that business, If you would grant the time.

If you shall cleave to my consent, when 'tis, It shall make honour for you.

So I lose none In seeking to augment it, but still keep My bosom franchised and allegiance clear, I shall be counsell'd.

Good repose the while! Thanks, sir: the like to you! Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready, She strike upon the bell.

Get thee to bed. Is this a dagger which I see before me, The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee.

Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going, And such an instrument I was to use.

Mine eyes are made the fools o' the other senses, Or else worth all the rest, I see thee still, And on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood, Which was not so before.

There's no such thing: It is the bloody business which informs Thus to mine eyes.

With Tarquin's ravishing strides, towards his design Moves like a ghost.

Thou sure and firm-set earth, Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear Thy very stones prate of my whereabout, And take the present horror from the time, Which now suits with it.

Whiles I threat, he lives: Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.

A bell rings I go, and it is done, the bell invites me.

Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell That summons thee to heaven or to hell.

That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold, What hath quench'd them hath given me fire.

Hark! Peace! It was the owl that shriek'd, the fatal bellman, Which gives the stern'st good-night.

He is about it: The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms Do mock their charge with snores: I have drugg'd their possets, That death and nature do contend about them, Whether they live or die.

Alack, I am afraid they have awaked, And 'tis not done.

Hark! I laid their daggers ready, He could not miss 'em.

Had he not resembled My father as he slept, I had done't.

Didst thou not hear a noise? I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.

Did not you speak? As I descended? Who lies i' the second chamber? This is a sorry sight.

Looking on his hands A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.

There's one did laugh in's sleep, and one cried That they did wake each other: I stood and heard them: But they did say their prayers, and address'd them Again to sleep.

One cried 'God bless us!' and 'Amen' the other, As they had seen me with these hangman's hands.

Listening their fear, I could not say 'Amen,' When they did say 'God bless us!' Consider it not so deeply.

But wherefore could not I pronounce 'Amen'? I had most need of blessing, and 'Amen' Stuck in my throat.

These deeds must not be thought After these ways, so, it will make us mad.

Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane, You do unbend your noble strength, to think So brainsickly of things.

Go get some water, And wash this filthy witness from your hand.

Why did you bring these daggers from the place? They must lie there: go carry them, and smear The sleepy grooms with blood.

I'll go no more: I am afraid to think what I have done, Look on't again I dare not.

Infirm of purpose! Give me the daggers: the sleeping and the dead Are but as pictures: 'tis the eye of childhood That fears a painted devil.

If he do bleed, I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal, For it must seem their guilt.

Whence is that knocking? How is't with me, when every noise appals me? What hands are here? ha! they pluck out mine eyes.

Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather The multitudinous seas in incarnadine, Making the green one red.

Re-enter LADY MACBETH My hands are of your colour, but I shame To wear a heart so white.

Knocking within I hear a knocking At the south entry: retire we to our chamber, A little water clears us of this deed: How easy is it, then! Your constancy Hath left you unattended.

Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us, And show us to be watchers.

Knocking within Wake Duncan with thy knocking! I would thou couldst! Knocking within.

Enter a Porter Here's a knocking indeed! If a man were porter of hell-gate, he should have old turning the key.

Knocking within knock, knock! Who's there? Faith, here's an English tailor come hither, for stealing out of a French hose: come in, tailor, here you may roast your goose.

Knocking within knock, never at quiet! What are you? But this place is too cold for hell.

I'll devil-porter it no further: I had thought to have let in some of all professions that go the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire.

Knocking within Anon, anon! I pray you, remember the porter.

Opens the gate Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed, That you do lie so late? 'Faith sir, we were carousing till the second cock: and drink, sir, is a great provoker of three things.

What three things does drink especially provoke? Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine.

He did command me to call timely on him: I have almost slipp'd the hour.

I know this is a joyful trouble to you, But yet 'tis one.

I'll make so bold to call, For 'tis my limited service.

Goes the king hence to-day? He does: he did appoint so.

My young remembrance cannot parallel A fellow to it.

Re-enter MACDUFF O horror, horror, horror! Tongue nor heart Cannot conceive nor name thee! What's the matter.

O Banquo, Banquo, Our royal master 's murder'd! Woe, alas! What, in our house? Too cruel any where.

Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself, And say it is not so.

What is amiss? You are, and do not know't: The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood Is stopp'd, the very source of it is stopp'd.

O, yet I do repent me of my fury, That I did kill them.

Wherefore did you so? Who can be wise, amazed, temperate and furious, Loyal and neutral, in a moment? No man: The expedition my violent love Outrun the pauser, reason.

That most may claim this argument for ours? where our fate, Hid in an auger-hole, may rush, and seize us? Let 's away, Our tears are not yet brew'd.

Look to the lady: LADY MACBETH is carried out And when we have our naked frailties hid, That suffer in exposure, let us meet, And question this most bloody piece of work, To know it further.

Fears and scruples shake us: In the great hand of God I stand, and thence Against the undivulged pretence I fight Of treasonous malice.

Let's briefly put on manly readiness, And meet i' the hall together.

What will you do? Let's not consort with them: To show an unfelt sorrow is an office Which the false man does easy.

I'll to England. To Ireland, I, our separated fortune Shall keep us both the safer: where we are, There's daggers in men's smiles: the near in blood, The nearer bloody.

This murderous shaft that's shot Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way Is to avoid the aim.

Therefore, to horse, And let us not be dainty of leave-taking, But shift away: there's warrant in that theft Which steals itself, when there's no mercy left.

Threescore and ten I can remember well: Within the volume of which time I have seen Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night Hath trifled former knowings.

On Tuesday last, A falcon, towering in her pride of place, Was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd.

They did so, to the amazement of mine eyes That look'd upon't.

Here comes the good Macduff. How goes the world, sir, now? Why, see you not? Is't known who did this more than bloody deed? Those that Macbeth hath slain.

Alas, the day! What good could they pretend? They were suborn'd: Malcolm and Donalbain, the king's two sons, Are stol'n away and fled, which puts upon them Suspicion of the deed.

'Gainst nature still! Thriftless ambition, that wilt ravin up Thine own life's means! Then 'tis most like The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.

He is already named, and gone to Scone To be invested.

Where is Duncan's body? Carried to Colmekill, The sacred storehouse of his predecessors, And guardian of their bones.

Well, may you see things well done there: adieu! Lest our old robes sit easier than our new! Farewell, father.

If there come truth from them-- As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine-- Why, by the verities on thee made good, May they not be my oracles as well, And set me up in hope? But hush! no more.

Enter MACBETH, as king, LADY  MACBETH, as queen, LENNOX, ROSS, Lords, Ladies, and Attendants Here's our chief guest.

If he had been forgotten, It had been as a gap in our great feast, And all-thing unbecoming.

To-night we hold a solemn supper sir, And I'll request your presence.

Let your highness Command upon me, to the which my duties Are with a most indissoluble tie For ever knit.

We should have else desired your good advice, Which still hath been both grave and prosperous, In this day's council, but we'll take to-morrow.

Is't far you ride? As far, my lord, as will fill up the time 'Twixt this and supper: go not my horse the better, I must become a borrower of the night For a dark hour or twain.

Hie you to horse: adieu, Till you return at night.

Goes Fleance with you? Ay, my good lord: our time does call upon 's.

I wish your horses swift and sure of foot, And so I do commend you to their backs.

There is none but he Whose being I do fear: and, under him, My Genius is rebuked, as, it is said, Mark Antony's was by Caesar.

And champion me to the utterance! Who's there! Re-enter Attendant, with two Murderers Now go to the door, and stay there till we call.

Was it not yesterday we spoke together? It was, so please your highness.

I did so, and went further, which is now Our point of second meeting.

from the bill That writes them all alike: and so of men.

I am one, my liege, Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world Have so incensed that I am reckless what I do to spite the world.

And I another So weary with disasters, tugg'd with fortune, That I would set my lie on any chance, To mend it, or be rid on't.

Though our lives-- Your spirits shine through you.

Banquo, thy soul's flight, If it find heaven, must find it out to-night.

Is Banquo gone from court? Ay, madam, but returns again to-night.

Say to the king, I would attend his leisure For a few words.

Nought's had, all's spent, Where our desire is got without content: 'Tis safer to be that which we destroy Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.

We have scotch'd the snake, not kill'd it: She'll close and be herself, whilst our poor malice Remains in danger of her former tooth.

Duncan is in his grave, After life's fitful fever he sleeps well, Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison, Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing, Can touch him further.

Come on, Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks, Be bright and jovial among your guests to-night.

O, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife! Thou know'st that Banquo, and his Fleance, lives.

What's to be done? Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, Till thou applaud the deed.

Thou marvell'st at my words: but hold thee still, Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.

But who did bid thee join with us? He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers Our offices and what we have to do To the direction just.

The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day: Now spurs the lated traveller apace To gain the timely inn, and near approaches The subject of our watch.

Then 'tis he: the rest That are within the note of expectation Already are i' the court.

Almost a mile: but he does usually, So all men do, from hence to the palace gate Make it their walk.

They set upon BANQUO O, treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly! Thou mayst revenge.

FLEANCE escapes Who did strike out the light? Wast not the way? There's but one down, the son is fled.

Enter MACBETH, LADY MACBETH, ROSS, LENNOX, Lords, and Attendants You know your own degrees, sit down: at first And last the hearty welcome.

Ourself will mingle with society, And play the humble host.

Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time We will require her welcome.

Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends, For my heart speaks they are welcome.

First Murderer appears at the door See, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks.

Both sides are even: here I'll sit i' the midst: Be large in mirth, anon we'll drink a measure The table round.

Is he dispatch'd? My lord, his throat is cut, that I did for him.

Thou art the best o' the cut-throats: yet he's good That did the like for Fleance: if thou didst it, Thou art the nonpareil.

But Banquo's safe? Ay, my good lord: safe in a ditch he bides, With twenty trenched gashes on his head, The least a death to nature.

Thanks for that: There the grown serpent lies, the worm that's fled Hath nature that in time will venom breed, No teeth for the present.

Get thee gone: to-morrow We'll hear, ourselves, again.

Sweet remembrancer! Now, good digestion wait on appetite, And health on both! May't please your highness sit.

Please't your highness To grace us with your royal company.

What is't that moves your highness? Which of you have done this? What, my good lord? Thou canst not say I did it: never shake Thy gory locks at me.

Are you a man? Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that Which might appal the devil.

O proper stuff! This is the very painting of your fear: This is the air-drawn dagger which, you said, Led you to Duncan.

O, these flaws and starts, Impostors to true fear, would well become A woman's story at a winter's fire, Authorized by her grandam.

Shame itself! Why do you make such faces? When all's done, You look but on a stool.

Prithee, see there! behold! look! lo! how say you? Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too.

If charnel-houses and our graves must send Those that we bury back, our monuments Shall be the maws of kites.

GHOST OF BANQUO vanishes What, quite unmann'd in folly? If I stand here, I saw him.

Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends, I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing To those that know me.

Give me some wine, fill full. I drink to the general joy o' the whole table, And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss, Would he were here! to all, and him, we thirst, And all to all.

Hence, horrible shadow! Unreal mockery, hence! GHOST OF BANQUO vanishes Why, so: being gone, I am a man again.

Pray you, sit still. You have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting, With most admired disorder.

What sights, my lord? I pray you, speak not, he grows worse and worse, Question enrages him.

At once, good night: Stand not upon the order of your going, But go at once.

What is the night? Almost at odds with morning, which is which.

I will to-morrow, And betimes I will, to the weird sisters: More shall they speak, for now I am bent to know, By the worst means, the worst.

My strange and self-abuse Is the initiate fear that wants hard use: We are yet but young in deed.

Enter the three Witches meeting HECATE Why, how now, Hecate! you look angerly.

But make amends now: get you gone, And at the pit of Acheron Meet me i' the morning: thither he Will come to know his destiny: Your vessels and your spells provide, Your charms and every thing beside.

Music and a song within: 'Come away, come away,'  and c Hark! I am call'd, my little spirit, see, Sits in a foggy cloud, and stays for me.

Come, let's make haste, she'll soon be back again.

My former speeches have but hit your thoughts, Which can interpret further: only, I say, Things have been strangely borne.

Sent he to Macduff? He did: and with an absolute 'Sir, not I,' The cloudy messenger turns me his back, And hums, as who should say 'You'll rue the time That clogs me with this answer.

And that well might Advise him to a caution, to hold what distance His wisdom can provide.

Enter the three Witches Thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd.

Round about the cauldron go, In the poison'd entrails throw.

Toad, that under cold stone Days and nights has thirty-one Swelter'd venom sleeping got, Boil thou first i' the charmed pot.

Double, double toil and trouble, Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.

Double, double toil and trouble, Fire burn and cauldron bubble.

Double, double toil and trouble, Fire burn and cauldron bubble.

Cool it with a baboon's blood, Then the charm is firm and good.

O well done! I commend your pains, And every one shall share i' the gains, And now about the cauldron sing, Live elves and fairies in a ring, Enchanting all that you put in.

Music and a song: 'Black spirits,'  and c HECATE retires By the pricking of my thumbs, Something wicked this way comes.

Open, locks, Whoever knocks! How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags! What is't you do? A deed without a name.

Say, if thou'dst rather hear it from our mouths, Or from our masters? Call 'em, let me see 'em.

Pour in sow's blood, that hath eaten Her nine farrow, grease that's sweaten From the murderer's gibbet throw Into the flame.

Come, high or low, Thyself and office deftly show! Thunder.

First Apparition: an armed Head Tell me, thou unknown power,-- He knows thy thought: Hear his speech, but say thou nought.

Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! beware Macduff, Beware the thane of Fife.

Dismiss me. Enough. Whate'er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks, Thou hast harp'd my fear aright: but one word more,-- He will not be commanded: here's another, More potent than the first.

Second Apparition: A bloody Child Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! Had I three ears, I'ld hear thee.

Be bloody, bold, and resolute, laugh to scorn The power of man, for none of woman born Shall harm Macbeth.

Third Apparition: a Child crowned, with a tree in his hand What is this That rises like the issue of a king, And wears upon his baby-brow the round And top of sovereignty? Listen, but speak not to't.

Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are: Macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until Great Birnam wood to high Dunsinane hill Shall come against him.

Yet my heart Throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your art Can tell so much: shall Banquo's issue ever Reign in this kingdom? Seek to know no more.

I will be satisfied: deny me this, And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know.

And thy hair, Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.

Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits: The flighty purpose never is o'ertook Unless the deed go with it, from this moment The very firstlings of my heart shall be The firstlings of my hand.

No boasting like a fool, This deed I'll do before this purpose cool.

But no more sights!--Where are these gentlemen? Come, bring me where they are.

What had he done, to make him fly the land? You must have patience, madam.

He had none: His flight was madness: when our actions do not, Our fears do make us traitors.

You know not Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.

All is the fear and nothing is the love, As little is the wisdom, where the flight So runs against all reason.

My dearest coz, I pray you, school yourself: but for your husband, He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows The fits o' the season.

I take my leave of you: Shall not be long but I'll be here again: Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward To what they were before.

My pretty cousin, Blessing upon you! Father'd he is, and yet he's fatherless.

I am so much a fool, should I stay longer, It would be my disgrace and your discomfort: I take my leave at once.

Sirrah, your father's dead, And what will you do now? How will you live? As birds do, mother.

What, with worms and flies? With what I get, I mean, and so do they.

Poor bird! thou'ldst never fear the net nor lime, The pitfall nor the gin.

Why should I, mother? Poor birds they are not set for.

Yes, he is dead, how wilt thou do for a father? Nay, how will you do for a husband? Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.

Thou speak'st with all thy wit: and yet, i' faith, With wit enough for thee.

And be all traitors that do so? Every one that does so is a traitor, and must be hanged.

And must they all be hanged that swear and lie? Every one.

Then the liars and swearers are fools, for there are liars and swearers enow to beat the honest men and hang up them.

Now, God help thee, poor monkey! But how wilt thou do for a father? If he were dead, you'ld weep for him: if you would not, it were a good sign that I should quickly have a new father.

Poor prattler, how thou talk'st! Bless you, fair dame! I am not to you known, Though in your state of honour I am perfect.

I doubt some danger does approach you nearly: If you will take a homely man's advice, Be not found here, hence, with your little ones.

To fright you thus, methinks, I am too savage, To do worse to you were fell cruelty, Which is too nigh your person.

What I believe I'll wail, What know believe, and what I can redress, As I shall find the time to friend, I will.

This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues, Was once thought honest: you have loved him well.

I am young, but something You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom To offer up a weak poor innocent lamb To appease an angry god.

A good and virtuous nature may recoil In an imperial charge.

Why in that rawness left you wife and child, Those precious motives, those strong knots of love, Without leave-taking? I pray you, Let not my jealousies be your dishonours, But mine own safeties.

Be not offended: I speak not as in absolute fear of you.

Not in the legions Of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd In evils to top Macbeth.

Boundless intemperance In nature is a tyranny, it hath been The untimely emptying of the happy throne And fall of many kings.

But fear not yet To take upon you what is yours: you may Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty, And yet seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink.

We have willing dames enough: there cannot be That vulture in you, to devour so many As will to greatness dedicate themselves, Finding it so inclined.

This avarice Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been The sword of our slain kings: yet do not fear, Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will.

Of your mere own: all these are portable, With other graces weigh'd.

Nay, had I power, I should Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell, Uproar the universal peace, confound All unity on earth.

O Scotland, Scotland! If such a one be fit to govern, speak: I am as I have spoken.

Fare thee well! These evils thou repeat'st upon thyself Have banish'd me from Scotland.

O my breast, Thy hope ends here! Macduff, this noble passion, Child of integrity, hath from my soul Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts To thy good truth and honour.

Now we'll together, and the chance of goodness Be like our warranted quarrel! Why are you silent? Such welcome and unwelcome things at once 'Tis hard to reconcile.

What's the disease he means? 'Tis call'd the evil: A most miraculous work in this good king, Which often, since my here-remain in England, I have seen him do.

With this strange virtue, He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, And sundry blessings hang about his throne, That speak him full of grace.

See, who comes here? My countryman, but yet I know him not.

Good God, betimes remove The means that makes us strangers! Sir, amen.

Stands Scotland where it did? Alas, poor country! Almost afraid to know itself.

O, relation Too nice, and yet too true! What's the newest grief? That of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker: Each minute teems a new one.

The tyrant has not batter'd at their peace? No, they were well at peace when I did leave 'em.

Be't their comfort We are coming thither: gracious England hath Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men, An older and a better soldier none That Christendom gives out.

Would I could answer This comfort with the like! But I have words That would be howl'd out in the desert air, Where hearing should not latch them.

What concern they? The general cause? or is it a fee-grief Due to some single breast? No mind that's honest But in it shares some woe, though the main part Pertains to you alone.

If it be mine, Keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.

Let not your ears despise my tongue for ever, Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound That ever yet they heard.

Your castle is surprised, your wife and babes Savagely slaughter'd: to relate the manner, Were, on the quarry of these murder'd deer, To add the death of you.

Merciful heaven! What, man! ne'er pull your hat upon your brows, Give sorrow words: the grief that does not speak Whispers the o'er-fraught heart and bids it break.

My children too? Wife, children, servants, all That could be found.

And I must be from thence! My wife kill'd too? I have said.

Be comforted: Let's make us medicines of our great revenge, To cure this deadly grief.

All my pretty ones? Did you say all? O hell-kite! All? What, all my pretty chickens and their dam At one fell swoop? Dispute it like a man.

I shall do so, But I must also feel it as a man: I cannot but remember such things were, That were most precious to me.

Did heaven look on, And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff, They were all struck for thee! naught that I am, Not for their own demerits, but for mine, Fell slaughter on their souls.

Heaven rest them now! Be this the whetstone of your sword: let grief Convert to anger, blunt not the heart, enrage it.

Come, go we to the king, our power is ready, Our lack is nothing but our leave, Macbeth Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above Put on their instruments.

Receive what cheer you may: The night is long that never finds the day.

I have two nights watched with you, but can perceive no truth in your report.

Neither to you nor any one, having no witness to confirm my speech.

Lo you, here she comes! This is her very guise, and, upon my life, fast asleep.

Observe her, stand close. How came she by that light? Why, it stood by her: she has light by her continually, 'tis her command.

What is it she does now? Look, how she rubs her hands.

It is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus washing her hands: I have known her continue in this a quarter of an hour.

Hark! she speaks: I will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.

Out, damned spot! out, I say!--One: two: why, then, 'tis time to do't.

Do you mark that? The thane of Fife had a wife: where is she now?-- What, will these hands ne'er be clean?--No more o' that, my lord, no more o' that: you mar all with this starting.

She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of that: heaven knows what she has known.

Here's the smell of the blood still: all the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand.

Oh, oh, oh! What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged.

I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole body.

This disease is beyond my practise: yet I have known those which have walked in their sleep who have died holily in their beds.

Wash your hands, put on your nightgown, look not so pale.

-I tell you yet again, Banquo's buried, he cannot come out on's grave.

Even so? To bed, to bed! there's knocking at the gate: come, come, come, come, give me your hand.

God, God forgive us all! Look after her, Remove from her the means of all annoyance, And still keep eyes upon her.

So, good night: My mind she has mated, and amazed my sight.

Near Birnam wood Shall we well meet them, that way are they coming.

Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother? For certain, sir, he is not: I have a file Of all the gentry: there is Siward's son, And many unrough youths that even now Protest their first of manhood.

Or so much as it needs, To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.

Bring me no more reports, let them fly all: Till Birnam wood remove to Dunsinane, I cannot taint with fear.

Then fly, false thanes, And mingle with the English epicures: The mind I sway by and the heart I bear Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.

The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon! Where got'st thou that goose look? There is ten thousand-- Geese, villain! Soldiers, sir.

Go prick thy face, and over-red thy fear, Thou lily-liver'd boy.

What soldiers, patch? Death of thy soul! those linen cheeks of thine Are counsellors to fear.

What soldiers, whey-face? The English force, so please you.

Seyton!--I am sick at heart, When I behold--Seyton, I say!--This push Will cheer me ever, or disseat me now.

Seyton! What is your gracious pleasure? What news more? All is confirm'd, my lord, which was reported.

Send out more horses, skirr the country round, Hang those that talk of fear.

Give me mine armour. How does your patient, doctor? Not so sick, my lord, As she is troubled with thick coming fancies, That keep her from her rest.

Doctor, the thanes fly from me. Come, sir, dispatch.

If thou couldst, doctor, cast The water of my land, find her disease, And purge it to a sound and pristine health, I would applaud thee to the very echo, That should applaud again.

-Pull't off, I say.-- What rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug, Would scour these English hence? Hear'st thou of them? Ay, my good lord, your royal preparation Makes us hear something.

I will not be afraid of death and bane, Till Birnam forest come to Dunsinane.

Enter MALCOLM, SIWARD and YOUNG  SIWARD, MACDUFF, MENTEITH, CAITHNESS, ANGUS, LENNOX, ROSS, and Soldiers, marching Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand That chambers will be safe.

Let every soldier hew him down a bough And bear't before him: thereby shall we shadow The numbers of our host and make discovery Err in report of us.

We learn no other but the confident tyrant Keeps still in Dunsinane, and will endure Our setting down before 't.

'Tis his main hope: For where there is advantage to be given, Both more and less have given him the revolt, And none serve with him but constrained things Whose hearts are absent too.

Let our just censures Attend the true event, and put we on Industrious soldiership.

The time approaches That will with due decision make us know What we shall say we have and what we owe.

Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate, But certain issue strokes must arbitrate: Towards which advance the war.

A cry of women within What is that noise? It is the cry of women, my good lord.

Re-enter SEYTON Wherefore was that cry? The queen, my lord, is dead.

She should have died hereafter, There would have been a time for such a word.

To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow, Creeps in this petty pace from day to day To the last syllable of recorded time, And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death.

Gracious my lord, I should report that which I say I saw, But know not how to do it.

As I did stand my watch upon the hill, I look'd toward Birnam, and anon, methought, The wood began to move.

Liar and slave! Let me endure your wrath, if't be not so: Within this three mile may you see it coming, I say, a moving grove.

If thou speak'st false, Upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive, Till famine cling thee: if thy speech be sooth, I care not if thou dost for me as much.

I pull in resolution, and begin To doubt the equivocation of the fiend That lies like truth: 'Fear not, till Birnam wood Do come to Dunsinane:'  and now a wood Comes toward Dunsinane.

Arm, arm, and out! If this which he avouches does appear, There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.

I gin to be aweary of the sun, And wish the estate o' the world were now undone.

Ring the alarum-bell! Blow, wind! come, wrack! At least we'll die with harness on our back.

Enter MALCOLM, SIWARD, MACDUFF, and their Army, with boughs Now near enough: your leafy screens throw down.

You, worthy uncle, Shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son, Lead our first battle: worthy Macduff and we Shall take upon 's what else remains to do, According to our order.

Do we but find the tyrant's power to-night, Let us be beaten, if we cannot fight.

Make all our trumpets speak, give them all breath, Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.

Enter MACBETH They have tied me to a stake, I cannot fly, But, bear-like, I must fight the course.

What's he That was not born of woman? Such a one Am I to fear, or none.

No, though thou call'st thyself a hotter name Than any is in hell.

The devil himself could not pronounce a title More hateful to mine ear.

Thou liest, abhorred tyrant, with my sword I'll prove the lie thou speak'st.

They fight and YOUNG SIWARD is slain Thou wast born of woman But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn, Brandish'd by man that's of a woman born.

Tyrant, show thy face! If thou be'st slain and with no stroke of mine, My wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still.

I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms Are hired to bear their staves: either thou, Macbeth, Or else my sword with an unbatter'd edge I sheathe again undeeded.

There thou shouldst be, By this great clatter, one of greatest note Seems bruited.

This way, my lord, the castle's gently render'd: The tyrant's people on both sides do fight, The noble thanes do bravely in the war, The day almost itself professes yours, And little is to do.

Why should I play the Roman fool, and die On mine own sword? whiles I see lives, the gashes Do better upon them.

Turn, hell-hound, turn! Of all men else I have avoided thee: But get thee back, my soul is too much charged With blood of thine already.

Despair thy charm, And let the angel whom thou still hast served Tell thee, Macduff was from his mother's womb Untimely ripp'd.

I will not yield, To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet, And to be baited with the rabble's curse.

Though Birnam wood be come to Dunsinane, And thou opposed, being of no woman born, Yet I will try the last.

Lay on, Macduff, And damn'd be him that first cries, 'Hold, enough!' Retreat.

Flourish. Enter, with drum and colours, MALCOLM, SIWARD, ROSS, the other Thanes, and Soldiers I would the friends we miss were safe arrived.

Some must go off: and yet, by these I see, So great a day as this is cheaply bought.

Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt: He only lived but till he was a man, The which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd In the unshrinking station where he fought, But like a man he died.

Then he is dead? Ay, and brought off the field: your cause of sorrow Must not be measured by his worth, for then It hath no end.

Why then, God's soldier be he! Had I as many sons as I have hairs, I would not wish them to a fairer death: And so, his knell is knoll'd.

He's worth more sorrow, And that I'll spend for him.

He's worth no more They say he parted well, and paid his score: And so, God be with him! Here comes newer comfort.

My thanes and kinsmen, Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland In such an honour named.

The nature of our people, Our city's institutions, and the terms For common justice, you're as pregnant in As art and practise hath enriched any That we remember.

There is our commission, From which we would not have you warp.

Always obedient to your grace's will, I come to know your pleasure.

There is a kind of character in thy life, That to the observer doth thy history Fully unfold.

Thyself and thy belongings Are not thine own so proper as to waste Thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee.

Heaven doth with us as we with torches do, Not light them for themselves, for if our virtues Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike As if we had them not.

Now, good my lord, Let there be some more test made of my metal, Before so noble and so great a figure Be stamp'd upon it.

No more evasion: We have with a leaven'd and prepared choice Proceeded to you, therefore take your honours.

Our haste from hence is of so quick condition That it prefers itself and leaves unquestion'd Matters of needful value.

We shall write to you, As time and our concernings shall importune, How it goes with us, and do look to know What doth befall you here.

So, fare you well, To the hopeful execution do I leave you Of your commissions.

Yet give leave, my lord, That we may bring you something on the way.

My haste may not admit it, Nor need you, on mine honour, have to do With any scruple, your scope is as mine own So to enforce or qualify the laws As to your soul seems good.

Once more, fare you well. The heavens give safety to your purposes! Lead forth and bring you back in happiness! I thank you.

Let us withdraw together, And we may soon our satisfaction have Touching that point.

If the duke with the other dukes come not to composition with the King of Hungary, why then all the dukes fall upon the king.

Heaven grant us its peace, but not the King of Thou concludest like the sanctimonious pirate, that went to sea with the Ten Commandments, but scraped one out of the table.

Why, 'twas a commandment to command the captain and all the rest from their functions: they put forth to steal.

There's not a soldier of us all, that, in the thanksgiving before meat, do relish the petition well that prays for peace.

I believe thee, for I think thou never wast where grace was said.

What, in metre? In any proportion or in any language.

Ay, why not? Grace is grace, despite of all controversy: as, for example, thou thyself art a wicked villain, despite of all grace.

I grant, as there may between the lists and the velvet.

I think I have done myself wrong, have I not? Yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or free.

where Madam Mitigation comes! I have purchased as many diseases under her roof as come to-- To what, I pray? To three thousand dolours a year.

Thou art always figuring diseases in me, but thou art full of error, I am sound.

Nay, not as one would say, healthy, but so sound as things that are hollow: thy bones are hollow, impiety has made a feast of thee.

How now! which of your hips has the most profound sciatica? Well, well, there's one yonder arrested and carried to prison was worth five thousand of you all.

Who's that, I pray thee? Marry, sir, that's Claudio, Signior Claudio.

Nay, but I know 'tis so: I saw him arrested, saw him carried away, and, which is more, within these three days his head to be chopped off.

But, after all this fooling, I would not have it so.

Art thou sure of this? I am too sure of it: and it is for getting Madam Julietta with child.

Believe me, this may be: he promised to meet me two hours since, and he was ever precise in Besides, you know, it draws something near to the speech we had to such a purpose.

Thus, what with the war, what with the sweat, what with the gallows and what with poverty, I am How now! what's the news with you? Yonder man is carried to prison.

But what's his offence? Groping for trouts in a peculiar river.

What, is there a maid with child by him? No, but there's a woman with maid by him.

You have not heard of the proclamation, have you? What proclamation, man? All houses in the suburbs of Vienna must be plucked down.

And what shall become of those in the city? They shall stand for seed: they had gone down too, but that a wise burgher put in for them.

But shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be pulled down? To the ground, mistress.

Courage! there will be pity taken on you: you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you will be considered.

What's to do here, Thomas tapster? let's withdraw.

Here comes Signior Claudio, led by the provost to prison, and there's Madam Juliet.

Fellow, why dost thou show me thus to the world? Bear me to prison, where I am committed.

I do it not in evil disposition, But from Lord Angelo by special charge.

Thus can the demigod Authority Make us pay down for our offence by weight The words of heaven, on whom it will, it will, On whom it will not, so, yet still 'tis just.

Our natures do pursue, Like rats that ravin down their proper bane, A thirsty evil, and when we drink we die.

If could speak so wisely under an arrest, I would send for certain of my creditors: and yet, to say the truth, I had as lief have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment.

What's thy offence, Claudio? What but to speak of would offend again.

Lucio, a word with you. A hundred, if they'll do you any good.

But it chances The stealth of our most mutual entertainment With character too gross is writ on Juliet.

I warrant it is: and thy head stands so tickle on thy shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it off.

Send after the duke and appeal to I have done so, but he's not to be found.

Come, officer, away! No, holy father, throw away that thought, Believe not that the dribbling dart of love Can pierce a complete bosom.

Why I desire thee To give me secret harbour, hath a purpose More grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends Of burning youth.

May your grace speak of it? My holy sir, none better knows than you How I have ever loved the life removed And held in idle price to haunt assemblies Where youth, and cost, and witless bravery keeps.

Now, pious sir, You will demand of me why I do this? Gladly, my lord.

The needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds, Which for this nineteen years we have let slip, Even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave, That goes not out to prey.

It rested in your grace To unloose this tied-up justice when you pleased: And it in you more dreadful would have seem'd Than in Lord Angelo.

Therefore indeed, my father, I have on Angelo imposed the office, Who may, in the ambush of my name, strike home, And yet my nature never in the fight To do in slander.

Gentle Isabella, Turn you the key, and know his business of him, You may, I may not, you are yet unsworn.

When you have vow'd, you must not speak with men But in the presence of the prioress: Then, if you speak, you must not show your face, Or, if you show your face, you must not speak.

Gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you: Not to be weary with you, he's in prison.

Woe me! for what? For that which, if myself might be his judge, He should receive his punishment in thanks: He hath got his friend with child.

I would not--though 'tis my familiar sin With maids to seem the lapwing and to jest, Tongue far from heart--play with all virgins so: I hold you as a thing ensky'd and sainted.

By your renouncement an immortal spirit, And to be talk'd with in sincerity, As with a saint.

Some one with child by him? My cousin Juliet? Is she your cousin? Adoptedly, as school-maids change their names By vain though apt affection.

All hope is gone, Unless you have the grace by your fair prayer To soften Angelo: and that's my pith of business 'Twixt you and your poor brother.

Doth he so seek his life? Has censured him Already, and, as I hear, the provost hath A warrant for his execution.

Alas! what poor ability's in me To do him good? Assay the power you have.

My power? Alas, I doubt-- Our doubts are traitors And make us lose the good we oft might win By fearing to attempt.

Go to Lord Angelo, And let him learn to know, when maidens sue, Men give like gods, but when they weep and kneel, All their petitions are as freely theirs As they themselves would owe them.

I will about it straight, No longer staying but to give the mother Notice of my affair.

I humbly thank you: Commend me to my brother: soon at night I'll send him certain word of my success.

We must not make a scarecrow of the law, Setting it up to fear the birds of prey, And let it keep one shape, till custom make it Their perch and not their terror.

Ay, but yet Let us be keen, and rather cut a little, Than fall, and bruise to death.

'Tis one thing to be tempted, Escalus, Another thing to fall.

I not deny, The jury, passing on the prisoner's life, May in the sworn twelve have a thief or two Guiltier than him they try.

You may not so extenuate his offence For I have had such faults, but rather tell me, When I, that censure him, do so offend, Let mine own judgment pattern out my death, And nothing come in partial.

Where is the provost? Here, if it like your honour.

See that Claudio Be executed by nine to-morrow morning: Bring him his confessor, let him be prepared, For that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.

Some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall: Some run from brakes of ice, and answer none: And some condemned for a fault alone.

Come, bring them away: if these be good people in a commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in common houses, I know no law: bring them away.

Go to: what quality are they of? Elbow is your name? why dost thou not speak, Elbow? He cannot, sir, he's out at elbow.

How dost thou know that, constable? Marry, sir, by my wife, who, if she had been a woman cardinally given, might have been accused in fornication, adultery, and all uncleanliness there.

By the woman's means? Ay, sir, by Mistress Overdone's means: but as she spit in his face, so she defied him.

Prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable man, prove it.

No, indeed, sir, not of a pin, you are therein in the right: but to the point.

Very well: you being then, if you be remembered, cracking the stones of the foresaid prunes,-- Ay, so I did indeed.

Why, very well, I telling you then, if you be remembered, that such a one and such a one were past cure of the thing you wot of, unless they kept very good diet, as I told you,-- All this is true.

Why, very well, then,-- Come, you are a tedious fool: to the purpose.

What was done to Elbow's wife, that he hath cause to complain of? Come me to what was done to her.

Sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour's leave.

And, I beseech you, look into Master Froth here, sir, a man of four-score pound a year, whose father died at Hallowmas: was't not at Hallowmas, Master Froth? All-hallond eve.

He, sir, sitting, as I say, in a lower chair, sir, 'twas in the Bunch of Grapes, where indeed you have a delight to sit, have you not? I have so, because it is an open room and good for winter.

This will last out a night in Russia, When nights are longest there: I'll take my leave.

And leave you to the hearing of the cause, Hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.

Good morrow to your lordship. Now, sir, come on: what was done to Elbow's wife, once more? Once, sir? there was nothing done to her once.

I beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.

Well, sir, what did this gentleman to her? I beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman's face.

Good Master Froth, look upon his honour, 'tis for a good purpose.

Doth your honour mark his face? Ay, sir, very well.

Doth your honour see any harm in his face? Why, no.

I'll be supposed upon a book, his face is the worst thing about him.

Good, then, if his face be the worst thing about him, how could Master Froth do the constable's wife any harm? I would know that of your honour.

Constable, what say you to it? First, an it like you, the house is a respected house, next, this is a respected fellow, and his mistress is a respected woman.

By this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected person than any of us all.

Varlet, thou liest, thou liest, wicked varlet! the time has yet to come that she was ever respected with man, woman, or child.

Sir, she was respected with him before he married with her.

Prove this, thou wicked Hannibal, or I'll have mine action of battery on thee.

If he took you a box o' the ear, you might have your action of slander too.

Thou seest, thou wicked varlet, now, what's come upon thee: thou art to continue now, thou varlet, thou art to continue.

Are you of fourscore pounds a year? Yes, an't please you, sir.

What trade are you of, sir? Tapster, a poor widow's tapster.

Hath she had any more than one husband? Nine, sir, Overdone by the last.

Master Froth, I would not have you acquainted with tapsters: they will draw you, Master Froth, and you will hang them.

For mine own part, I never come into any room in a tap-house, but I am drawn Well, no more of it, Master Froth: farewell.

What's your name, Master tapster? What else? Bum, sir.

Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you, so that in the beastliest sense you are Pompey the Great.

Pompey, you are partly a bawd, Pompey, howsoever you colour it in being a tapster, are you not? come, tell me true: it shall be the better for you.

How would you live, Pompey? by being a bawd? What do you think of the trade, Pompey? is it a lawful trade? If the law would allow it, sir.

But the law will not allow it, Pompey, nor it shall not be allowed in Vienna.

Does your worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of the city? No, Pompey.

Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to't then.

If your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves, you need not to fear the bawds.

There are pretty orders beginning, I can tell you: it is but heading and hanging.

I thank your worship for your good counsel: but I shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall better determine.

Whip me? No, no, let carman whip his jade: The valiant heart is not whipt out of his trade.

Come hither to me, Master Elbow, come hither, Master constable.

How long have you been in this place of constable? Seven year and a half, sir.

I thought, by your readiness in the office, you had continued in it some time.

Fare you well. What's o'clock, think you? Eleven, sir.

It grieves me for the death of Claudio, But there's no remedy.

It is but needful: Mercy is not itself, that oft looks so, Pardon is still the nurse of second woe: But yet,--poor Claudio! There is no remedy.

He's hearing of a cause, he will come straight I'll tell him of you.

Alas, He hath but as offended in a dream! All sects, all ages smack of this vice, and he To die for't! Now, what's the matter.

Go to, let that be mine: Do you your office, or give up your place, And you shall well be spared.

What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet? She's very near her hour.

Dispose of her To some more fitter place, and that with speed.

Re-enter Servant Here is the sister of the man condemn'd Desires access to you.

Hath he a sister? Ay, my good lord, a very virtuous maid, And to be shortly of a sisterhood, If not already.

See you the fornicatress be removed: Let have needful, but not lavish, means, There shall be order for't.

To ISABELLA You're welcome: what's your will? I am a woeful suitor to your honour, Please but your honour hear me.

Well, the matter? I have a brother is condemn'd to die: I do beseech you, let it be his fault, And not my brother.

Yes, I do think that you might pardon him, And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.

But can you, if you would? Look, what I will not, that I cannot do.

But might you do't, and do the world no wrong, If so your heart were touch'd with that remorse A s mine is to him? He's sentenced, 'tis too late.

If he had been as you and you as he, You would have slipt like him, but he, like you, Would not have been so stern.

I would to heaven I had your potency, And you were Isabel! should it then be thus? No, I would tell what 'twere to be a judge, And what a prisoner.

Your brother is a forfeit of the law, And you but waste your words.

Alas, alas! Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once, And He that might the vantage best have took Found out the remedy.

How would you be, If He, which is the top of judgment, should But judge you as you are? O, think on that, And mercy then will breathe within your lips, Like man new made.

Be you content, fair maid, It is the law, not I condemn your brother: Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son, It should be thus with him: he must die tomorrow.

To-morrow! O, that's sudden! Spare him, spare him! He's not prepared for death.

I show it most of all when I show justice, For then I pity those I do not know, Which a dismiss'd offence would after gall, And do him right that, answering one foul wrong, Lives not to act another.

Be satisfied, Your brother dies to-morrow, be content.

So you must be the first that gives this sentence, And he, that suffer's.

O, it is excellent To have a giant's strength, but it is tyrannous To use it like a giant.

We cannot weigh our brother with ourself: Great men may jest with saints, 'tis wit in them, But in the less foul profanation.

That in the captain's but a choleric word, Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.

Why do you put these sayings upon me? Because authority, though it err like others, Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself, That skins the vice o' the top.

How! bribe me? Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.

Heaven keep your honour safe! For I am that way going to temptation, Where prayers cross.

At what hour to-morrow Shall I attend your lordship? At any time 'fore noon.

Even till now, When men were fond, I smiled and wonder'd how.

What's your will, good friar? Bound by my charity and my blest order, I come to visit the afflicted spirits Here in the prison.

Do me the common right To let me see them and to make me know The nature of their crimes, that I may minister To them accordingly.

I have provided for you: stay awhile, To JULIET And you shall be conducted.

Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry? I do, and bear the shame most patiently.

I'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience, And try your penitence, if it be sound, Or hollowly put on.

Love you the man that wrong'd you? Yes, as I love the woman that wrong'd him.

So then it seems your most offenceful act Was mutually committed? Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.

Your partner, as I hear, must die to-morrow, And I am going with instruction to him.

Grace go with you, Benedicite! Must die to-morrow! O injurious love, That respites me a life, whose very comfort Is still a dying horror! 'Tis pity of him.

When I would pray and think, I think and pray To several subjects.

How now! who's there? One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.

How now, fair maid? I am come to know your pleasure.

That you might know it, would much better please me Than to demand what 'tis.

Heaven keep your honour! Yet may he live awhile, and, it may be, As long as you or I yet he must die.

Under your sentence? When, I beseech you? that in his reprieve, Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted That his soul sicken not.

I talk not of your soul: our compell'd sins Stand more for number than for accompt.

How say you? Nay, I'll not warrant that, for I can speak Against the thing I say.

Pleased you to do't at peril of your soul, Were equal poise of sin and charity.

That I do beg his life, if it be sin, Heaven let me bear it! you granting of my suit, If that be sin, I'll make it my morn prayer To have it added to the faults of mine, And nothing of your answer.

Your sense pursues not mine: either you are ignorant, Or seem so craftily, and that's not good.

Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good, But graciously to know I am no better.

Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright When it doth tax itself, as these black masks Proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder Than beauty could, display'd.

But mark me, To be received plain, I'll speak more gross: Your brother is to die.

And his offence is so, as it appears, Accountant to the law upon that pain.

And 'twere the cheaper way: Better it were a brother died at once, Than that a sister, by redeeming him, Should die for ever.

Were not you then as cruel as the sentence That you have slander'd so? Ignomy in ransom and free pardon Are of two houses: lawful mercy Is nothing kin to foul redemption.

You seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant, And rather proved the sliding of your brother A merriment than a vice.

O, pardon me, my lord, it oft falls out, To have what we would have, we speak not what we mean: I something do excuse the thing I hate, For his advantage that I dearly love.

Else let my brother die, If not a feodary, but only he Owe and succeed thy weakness.

Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves, Which are as easy broke as they make forms.

Women! Help Heaven! men their creation mar In profiting by them.

Nay, call us ten times frail, For we are soft as our complexions are, And credulous to false prints.

I think it well: And from this testimony of your own sex,-- Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger Than faults may shake our frames,--let me be bold, I do arrest your words.

Be that you are, That is, a woman, if you be more, you're none, If you be one, as you are well express'd By all external warrants, show it now, By putting on the destined livery.

I have no tongue but one: gentle my lord, Let me entreat you speak the former language.

My brother did love Juliet, And you tell me that he shall die for it.

I know your virtue hath a licence in't, Which seems a little fouler than it is, To pluck on others.

Believe me, on mine honour, My words express my purpose.

Answer me to-morrow, Or, by the affection that now guides me most, I'll prove a tyrant to him.

As for you, Say what you can, my false o'erweighs your true.

That, had he twenty heads to tender down On twenty bloody blocks, he'ld yield them up, Before his sister should her body stoop To such abhorr'd pollution.

Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die: More than our brother is our chastity.

I'll tell him yet of Angelo's request, And fit his mind to death, for his soul's rest.

So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo? The miserable have no other medicine But only hope: I've hope to live, and am prepared to die.

Be absolute for death, either death or life Shall thereby be the sweeter.

Thou art not noble, For all the accommodations that thou bear'st Are nursed by baseness.

Thou'rt by no means valiant, For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork Of a poor worm.

Thy best of rest is sleep, And that thou oft provokest, yet grossly fear'st Thy death, which is no more.

Thou art not thyself, For thou exist'st on many a thousand grains That issue out of dust.

Happy thou art not, For what thou hast not, still thou strivest to get, And what thou hast, forget'st.

Thou art not certain, For thy complexion shifts to strange effects, After the moon.

If thou art rich, thou'rt poor, For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows, Thou bear's thy heavy riches but a journey, And death unloads thee.

Friend hast thou none, For thine own bowels, which do call thee sire, The mere effusion of thy proper loins, Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum, For ending thee no sooner.

What's yet in this That bears the name of life? Yet in this life Lie hid moe thousand deaths: yet death we fear, That makes these odds all even.

To sue to live, I find I seek to die, And, seeking death, find life: let it come on.

Who's there? come in: the wish deserves a welcome.

Look, signior, here's your sister. Provost, a word with you.

Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be concealed.

Now, sister, what's the comfort? As all comforts are, most good, most good indeed.

Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven, Intends you for his swift ambassador, Where you shall be an everlasting leiger: Therefore your best appointment make with speed, To-morrow you set on.

Is there no remedy? None, but such remedy as, to save a head, To cleave a heart in twain.

But is there any? Yes, brother, you may live: There is a devilish mercy in the judge, If you'll implore it, that will free your life, But fetter you till death.

Perpetual durance? Ay, just, perpetual durance, a restraint, Though all the world's vastidity you had, To a determined scope.

But in what nature? In such a one as, you consenting to't, Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear, And leave you naked.

O, I do fear thee, Claudio, and I quake, Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain, And six or seven winters more respect Than a perpetual honour.

Darest thou die? The sense of death is most in apprehension, And the poor beetle, that we tread upon, In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great As when a giant dies.

Why give you me this shame? Think you I can a resolution fetch From flowery tenderness? If I must die, I will encounter darkness as a bride, And hug it in mine arms.

There spake my brother, there my father's grave Did utter forth a voice.

Yes, thou must die: Thou art too noble to conserve a life In base appliances.

The prenzie Angelo! O, 'tis the cunning livery of hell, The damned'st body to invest and cover In prenzie guards! Dost thou think, Claudio? If I would yield him my virginity, Thou mightst be freed.

Yes, he would give't thee, from this rank offence, So to offend him still.

This night's the time That I should do what I abhor to name, Or else thou diest to-morrow.

O, were it but my life, I'ld throw it down for your deliverance As frankly as a pin.

Has he affections in him, That thus can make him bite the law by the nose, When he would force it? Sure, it is no sin, Or of the deadly seven, it is the least.

Which is the least? If it were damnable, he being so wise, Why would he for the momentary trick Be perdurably fined? O Isabel! What says my brother? Death is a fearful thing.

Alas, alas! Sweet sister, let me live: What sin you do to save a brother's life, Nature dispenses with the deed so far That it becomes a virtue.

Take my defiance! Die, perish! Might but my bending down Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed: I'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death, No word to save thee.

O, fie, fie, fie! Thy sin's not accidental, but a trade.

Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd: 'Tis best thou diest quickly.

O hear me, Isabella! Re-enter DUKE VINCENTIO Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.

What is your will? Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and by have some speech with you: the satisfaction I would require is likewise your own benefit.

I have no superfluous leisure, my stay must be stolen out of other affairs, but I will attend you awhile.

Walks apart Son, I have overheard what hath passed between you and your sister.

I am so out of love with life that I will sue to be rid of it.

Provost, a word with you! Re-enter Provost What's your will, father That now you are come, you will be gone.

Leave me awhile with the maid: my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch her by my company.

The assault that Angelo hath made to you, fortune hath conveyed to my understanding, and, but that frailty hath examples for his falling, I should wonder at Angelo.

How will you do to content this substitute, and to save your brother? I am now going to resolve him: I had rather my brother die by the law than my son should be unlawfully born.

But, O, how much is the good duke deceived in Angelo! If ever he return and I can speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or discover his government.

That shall not be much amiss: Yet, as the matter now stands, he will avoid your accusation, he made trial of you only.

Therefore fasten your ear on my advisings: to the love I have in doing good a remedy presents itself.

I have spirit to do anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.

Have you not heard speak of Mariana, the sister of Frederick the great soldier who miscarried at sea? I have heard of the lady, and good words went with her name.

The maid will I frame and make fit for his attempt.

If you think well to carry this as you may, the doubleness of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof.

What think you of it? The image of it gives me content already, and I trust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection.

Haste you speedily to Angelo: if for this night he entreat you to his bed, give him promise of satisfaction.

I will presently to Saint Luke's: there, at the moated grange, resides this dejected Mariana.

At that place call upon me, and dispatch with Angelo, that it may be quickly.

Fare you well, good father. Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will needs buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall have all the world drink brown and white bastard.

'Bless you, good father friar. And you, good brother father.

Fie, sirrah! a bawd, a wicked bawd! The evil that thou causest to be done, That is thy means to live.

Do thou but think What 'tis to cram a maw or clothe a back From such a filthy vice: say to thyself, From their abominable and beastly touches I drink, I eat, array myself, and live.

Canst thou believe thy living is a life, So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.

Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir, but yet, sir, I would prove-- Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin, Thou wilt prove his.

Take him to prison, officer: Correction and instruction must both work Ere this rude beast will profit.

He must before the deputy, sir, he has given him warning: the deputy cannot abide a whoremaster: if he be a whoremonger, and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his errand.

That we were all, as some would seem to be, From our faults, as faults from seeming, free! His neck will come to your waist,--a cord, sir.

Why, 'tis good, it is the right of it, it must be so: ever your fresh whore and your powdered bawd: an unshunned consequence, it must be so.

For debt, Pompey? or how? For being a bawd, for being a bawd.

Well, then, imprison him: if imprisonment be the due of a bawd, why, 'tis his right: bawd is he doubtless, and of antiquity too, bawd-born.

Commend me to the prison, Pompey: you will turn good husband now, Pompey, you will keep the house.

No, indeed, will I not, Pompey, it is not the wear.

I will pray, Pompey, to increase your bondage: If you take it not patiently, why, your mettle is the more.

Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha? Come your ways, sir, come.

You will not bail me, then, sir? Then, Pompey, nor now.

What news abroad, friar? what news? Come your ways, sir, come.

Can you tell me of any? Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia, other some, he is in Rome: but where is he, think you? I know not where, but wheresoever, I wish him well.

It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the state, and usurp the beggary he was never born to.

Lord Angelo dukes it well in his absence, he puts transgression to 't.

A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him: something too crabbed that way, friar.

It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.

Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred, it is well allied: but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar, till eating and drinking be put down.

But it is certain that when he makes water his urine is congealed ice, that I know to be true: and he is a motion generative, that's infallible.

I never heard the absent duke much detected for women, he was not inclined that way.

Who, not the duke? yes, your beggar of fifty, and his use was to put a ducat in her clack-dish: the duke had crotchets in him.

Either this is the envy in you, folly, or mistaking: the very stream of his life and the business he hath helmed must upon a warranted need give him a better proclamation.

Let him be but testimonied in his own bringings-forth, and he shall appear to the envious a scholar, a statesman and a soldier.

Therefore you speak unskilfully: or if your knowledge be more it is much darkened in your malice.

Love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with dearer love.

I can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak.

But, if ever the duke return, as our prayers are he may, let me desire you to make your answer before him.

If it be honest you have spoke, you have courage to maintain it: I am bound to call upon you, and, I pray you, your name? Sir, my name is Lucio, well known to the duke.

He shall know you better, sir, if I may live to report you.

O, you hope the duke will return no more, or you imagine me too unhurtful an opposite.

But indeed I can do you little harm, you'll forswear this again.

I'll be hanged first: thou art deceived in me, friar.

But no more of this. Canst thou tell if Claudio die to-morrow or no? Why should he die, sir? Why? For filling a bottle with a tundish.

I would the duke we talk of were returned again: the ungenitured agent will unpeople the province with continency, sparrows must not build in his house-eaves, because they are lecherous.

The duke yet would have dark deeds darkly answered, he would never bring them to light: would he were returned! Marry, this Claudio is condemned for untrussing.

The duke, I say to thee again, would eat mutton on Fridays.

He's not past it yet, and I say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar, though she smelt brown bread and garlic: say that I said so.

Farewell. No might nor greatness in mortality Can censure 'scape, back-wounding calumny The whitest virtue strikes.

What king so strong Can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue? But who comes here? Go, away with her to prison! Good my lord, be good to me, your honour is accounted a merciful man, good my lord.

Double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the same kind! This would make mercy swear and play the tyrant.

A bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please your honour.

My lord, this is one Lucio's information against me.

Provost, my brother Angelo will not be altered, Claudio must die to-morrow: let him be furnished with divines, and have all charitable preparation.

if my brother wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.

So please you, this friar hath been with him, and advised him for the entertainment of death.

There is scarce truth enough alive to make societies secure, but security enough to make fellowships accurst: much upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world.

This news is old enough, yet it is every day's news.

I pray you, sir, of what disposition was the duke? One that, above all other strifes, contended especially to know himself.

What pleasure was he given to? Rather rejoicing to see another merry, than merry at any thing which professed to make him rejoice: a gentleman of all temperance.

But leave we him to his events, with a prayer they may prove prosperous, and let me desire to know how you find Claudio prepared.

I am made to understand that you have lent him visitation.

You have paid the heavens your function, and the prisoner the very debt of your calling.

I have laboured for the poor gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty: but my brother justice have I found so severe, that he hath forced me to tell him he is indeed Justice.

If his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding, it shall become him well, wherein if he chance to fail, he hath sentenced himself.

Break off thy song, and haste thee quick away: Here comes a man of comfort, whose advice Hath often still'd my brawling discontent.

I cry you mercy, sir, and well could wish You had not found me here so musical: Let me excuse me, and believe me so, My mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.

'Tis good, though music oft hath such a charm To make bad good, and good provoke to harm.

I pray, you, tell me, hath any body inquired for me here to-day? much upon this time have I promised here to meet.

You have not been inquired after: I have sat here all day.

I shall crave your forbearance a little: may be I will call upon you anon, for some advantage to yourself.

But shall you on your knowledge find this way? I have ta'en a due and wary note upon't: With whispering and most guilty diligence, In action all of precept, he did show me The way twice o'er.

I have not yet made known to Mariana A word of this.

What, ho! within! come forth! Re-enter MARIANA I pray you, be acquainted with this maid, She comes to do you good.

Do you persuade yourself that I respect you? Good friar, I know you do, and have found it.

Take, then, this your companion by the hand, Who hath a story ready for your ear.

I shall attend your leisure: but make haste, The vaporous night approaches.

Re-enter MARIANA and ISABELLA Welcome, how agreed? She'll take the enterprise upon her, father, If you advise it.

Little have you to say When you depart from him, but, soft and low, 'Remember now my brother.

He is your husband on a pre-contract: To bring you thus together, 'tis no sin, Sith that the justice of your title to him Doth flourish the deceit.

Come, let us go: Our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.

Can you cut off a man's head? If the man be a bachelor, sir, I can, but if he be a married man, he's his wife's head, and I can never cut off a woman's head.

Come, sir, leave me your snatches, and yield me a direct answer.

To-morrow morning are to die Claudio and Barnardine.

Sir, I have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind, but yet I will be content to be a lawful hangman.

I would be glad to receive some instruction from my fellow partner.

What, ho! Abhorson! Where's Abhorson, there? Do you call, sir? Sirrah, here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in your execution.

If you think it meet, compound with him by the year, and let him abide here with you, if not, use him for the present and dismiss him.

He cannot plead his estimation with you, he hath been a bawd.

A bawd, sir? fie upon him! he will discredit our mystery.

Go to, sir, you weigh equally, a feather will turn the scale.

Re-enter Provost Are you agreed? Sir, I will serve him, for I do find your hangman is a more penitent trade than your bawd, he doth oftener ask forgiveness.

You, sirrah, provide your block and your axe to-morrow four o'clock.

Come on, bawd, I will instruct thee in my trade, follow.

I do desire to learn, sir: and I hope, if you have occasion to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare, for truly, sir, for your kindness I owe you a good turn.

Call hither Barnardine and Claudio: The one has my pity, not a jot the other, Being a murderer, though he were my brother.

Look, here's the warrant, Claudio, for thy death: 'Tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow Thou must be made immortal.

Where's Barnardine? As fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour When it lies starkly in the traveller's bones: He will not wake.

Who can do good on him? Well, go, prepare yourself.

Knocking within But, hark, what noise? Heaven give your spirits comfort! By and by.

I hope it is some pardon or reprieve For the most gentle Claudio.

The best and wholesomest spirts of the night Envelope you, good Provost! Who call'd here of late? None, since the curfew rung.

What comfort is for Claudio? There's some in hope.

This is a gentle provost: seldom when The steeled gaoler is the friend of men.

Knocking within How now! what noise? That spirit's possessed with haste That wounds the unsisting postern with these strokes.

Re-enter Provost There he must stay until the officer Arise to let him in: he is call'd up.

Have you no countermand for Claudio yet, But he must die to-morrow? None, sir, none.

As near the dawning, provost, as it is, You shall hear more ere morning.

You something know, yet I believe there comes No countermand, no such example have we: Besides, upon the very siege of justice Lord Angelo hath to the public ear Profess'd the contrary.

My lord hath sent you this note, and by me this further charge, that you swerve not from the smallest article of it, neither in time, matter, or other circumstance.

Hence hath offence his quick celerity, When it is born in high authority: When vice makes mercy, mercy's so extended, That for the fault's love is the offender friended.

Lord Angelo, belike thinking me remiss in mine office, awakens me with this unwonted putting-on, methinks strangely, for he hath not used it before.

'Whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let Claudio be executed by four of the clock, and in the afternoon Barnardine: for my better satisfaction, let me have Claudio's head sent me by five.

Let this be duly performed, with a thought that more depends on it than we must yet deliver.

Thus fail not to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.

What say you to this, sir? What is that Barnardine who is to be executed in the A Bohemian born, but here nursed un and bred, one that is a prisoner nine years old.

How came it that the absent duke had not either delivered him to his liberty or executed him? I have heard it was ever his manner to do so.

His friends still wrought reprieves for him: and, indeed, his fact, till now in the government of Lord Angelo, came not to an undoubtful proof.

It is now apparent? Most manifest, and not denied by himself.

He will hear none: he hath evermore had the liberty of the prison, give him leave to escape hence, he would not: drunk many times a day, if not many days entirely drunk.

We have very oft awaked him, as if to carry him to execution, and showed him a seeming warrant for it: it hath not moved him at all.

There is written in your brow, provost, honesty and constancy: if I read it not truly, my ancient skill beguiles me, but, in the boldness of my cunning, I will lay myself in hazard.

Claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is no greater forfeit to the law than Angelo who hath sentenced him.

To make you understand this in a manifested effect, I crave but four days' respite, for the which you are to do me both a present and a dangerous courtesy.

A lack, how may I do it, having the hour limited, and an express command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the view of Angelo? I may make my case as Claudio's, to cross this in the smallest.

By the vow of mine order I warrant you, if my instructions may be your guide.

Let this Barnardine be this morning executed, and his head born to Angelo.

Angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.

O, death's a great disguiser, and you may add to it.

Shave the head, and tie the beard, and say it was the desire of the penitent to be so bared before his death: you know the course is common.

If any thing fall to you upon this, more than thanks and good fortune, by the saint whom I profess, I will plead against it with my life.

Were you sworn to the duke, or to the deputy? To him, and to his substitutes.

You will think you have made no offence, if the duke avouch the justice of your dealing? But what likelihood is in that? Not a resemblance, but a certainty.

Yet since I see you fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor persuasion can with ease attempt you, I will go further than I meant, to pluck all fears out of you.

Look you, sir, here is the hand and seal of the duke: you know the character, I doubt not, and the signet is not strange to you.

The contents of this is the return of the duke: you shall anon over-read it at your pleasure, where you shall find, within these two days he will be here.

Put not yourself into amazement how these things should be: all difficulties are but easy when they are known.

Call your executioner, and off with Barnardine's head: I will give him a present shrift and advise him for a better place.

Yet you are amazed, but this shall absolutely resolve you.

I am as well acquainted here as I was in our house of profession: one would think it were Mistress Overdone's own house, for here be many of her old customers.

Then is there here one Master Caper, at the suit of Master Three-pile the mercer, for some four suits of peach-coloured satin, which now peaches him a beggar.

Master Barnardine! What, ho, Barnardine! noise there? What are you? Your friends, sir, the hangman.

You must be so good, sir, to rise and be put to death.

Pray, Master Barnardine, awake till you are executed, and sleep afterwards.

He is coming, sir, he is coming, I hear his straw rustle.

Is the axe upon the block, sirrah? Very ready, sir.

How now, Abhorson? what's the news with you? Truly, sir, I would desire you to clap into your prayers, for, look you, the warrant's come.

You rogue, I have been drinking all night, I am not fitted for 't.

O, the better, sir, for he that drinks all night, and is hanged betimes in the morning, may sleep the sounder all the next day.

Look you, sir, here comes your ghostly father: do we jest now, think you? Sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily you are to depart, I am come to advise you, comfort you and pray with you.

Friar, not I	I have been drinking hard all night, and I will have more time to prepare me, or they shall beat out my brains with billets: I will not consent to die this day, that's certain.

O, sir, you must: and therefore I beseech you Look forward on the journey you shall go.

I swear I will not die to-day for any man's But hear you.

Not a word: if you have any thing to say to me, come to my ward, for thence will not I to-day.

Unfit to live or die: O gravel heart! After him, fellows, bring him to the block.

Re-enter Provost Now, sir, how do you find the prisoner? A creature unprepared, unmeet for death, And to transport him in the mind he is Were damnable.

Here in the prison, father, There died this morning of a cruel fever One Ragozine, a most notorious pirate, A man of Claudio's years, his beard and head Just of his colour.

But Barnardine must die this afternoon: And how shall we continue Claudio, To save me from the danger that might come If he were known alive? Let this be done.

Put them in secret holds, both Barnardine and Claudio: Ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting To the under generation, you shall find Your safety manifested.

Re-enter Provost Here is the head, I'll carry it myself.

Make a swift return, For I would commune with you of such things That want no ear but yours.

She's come to know If yet her brother's pardon be come hither: But I will keep her ignorant of her good, To make her heavenly comforts of despair, When it is least expected.

Ho, by your leave! Good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.

Hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon? He hath released him, Isabel, from the world: His head is off and sent to Angelo.

It is no other: show your wisdom, daughter, In your close patience.

O, I will to him and pluck out his eyes! You shall not be admitted to his sight.

Unhappy Claudio! wretched Isabel! Injurious world! most damned Angelo! This nor hurts him nor profits you a jot, Forbear it therefore, give your cause to heaven.

If you can, pace your wisdom In that good path that I would wish it go, And you shall have your bosom on this wretch, Grace of the duke, revenges to your heart, And general honour.

This letter, then, to Friar Peter give, 'Tis that he sent me of the duke's return: Say, by this token, I desire his company At Mariana's house to-night.

Her cause and yours I'll perfect him withal, and he shall bring you Before the duke, and to the head of Angelo Accuse him home and home.

For my poor self, I am combined by a sacred vow And shall be absent.

Wend you with this letter: Command these fretting waters from your eyes With a light heart, trust not my holy order, If I pervert your course.

O pretty Isabella, I am pale at mine heart to see thine eyes so red: thou must be patient.

I am fain to dine and sup with water and bran, I dare not for my head fill my belly, one fruitful meal would set me to 't.

By my troth, Isabel, I loved thy brother: if the old fantastical duke of dark corners had been at home, he had lived.

Sir, the duke is marvellous little beholding to your reports, but the best is, he lives not in them.

Friar, thou knowest not the duke so well as I do: he's a better woodman than thou takest him for.

Fare ye well. Nay, tarry, I'll go along with thee I can tell thee pretty tales of the duke.

You have told me too many of him already, sir, if they be true, if not true, none were enough.

I was once before him for getting a wench with child.

Did you such a thing? Yes, marry, did I	but I was fain to forswear it, they would else have married me to the rotten medlar.

Rest you well. By my troth, I'll go with thee to the lane's end: if bawdy talk offend you, we'll have very little of it.

Nay, friar, I am a kind of burr, I shall stick. Every letter he hath writ hath disvouched other.

His actions show much like to madness: pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted! And why meet him at the gates, and redeliver our authorities there I guess not.

Well, I beseech you, let it be proclaimed betimes i' the morn, I'll call you at your house: give notice to such men of sort and suit as are to meet I shall, sir.

This deed unshapes me quite, makes me unpregnant And dull to all proceedings.

He should have lived, Save that riotous youth, with dangerous sense, Might in the times to come have ta'en revenge, By so receiving a dishonour'd life With ransom of such shame.

Would yet he had lived! A lack, when once our grace we have forgot, Nothing goes right: we would, and we would not.

These letters at fit time deliver me Giving letters The provost knows our purpose and our plot.

The matter being afoot, keep your instruction, And hold you ever to our special drift, Though sometimes you do blench from this to that, As cause doth minister.

Go call at Flavius' house, And tell him where I stay: give the like notice To Valentinus, Rowland, and to Crassus, And bid them bring the trumpets to the gate, But send me Flavius first.

I thank thee, Varrius, thou hast made good haste: Come, we will walk.

There's other of our friends Will greet us here anon, my gentle Varrius.

To speak so indirectly I am loath: I would say the truth, but to accuse him so, That is your part: yet I am advised to do it, He says, to veil full purpose.

Besides, he tells me that, if peradventure He speak against me on the adverse side, I should not think it strange, for 'tis a physic That's bitter to sweet end.

I would Friar Peter-- O, peace! the friar is come.

Come, I have found you out a stand most fit, Where you may have such vantage on the duke, He shall not pass you.

Enter DUKE VINCENTIO, VARRIUS, Lords,  ANGELO, ESCALUS, LUCIO, Provost, Officers, and Citizens, at several doors My very worthy cousin, fairly met! Our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.

Happy return be to your royal grace! Many and hearty thankings to you both.

We have made inquiry of you, and we hear Such goodness of your justice, that our soul Cannot but yield you forth to public thanks, Forerunning more requital.

Give me your hand, And let the subject see, to make them know That outward courtesies would fain proclaim Favours that keep within.

Come, Escalus, You must walk by us on our other hand, And good supporters are you.

FRIAR PETER and ISABELLA come forward Now is your time: speak loud and kneel before him.

Here is Lord Angelo shall give you justice: Reveal yourself to him.

O worthy duke, You bid me seek redemption of the devil: Hear me yourself, for that which I must speak Must either punish me, not being believed, Or wring redress from you.

It is not truer he is Angelo Than this is all as true as it is strange: Nay, it is ten times true, for truth is truth To the end of reckoning.

Away with her! Poor soul, She speaks this in the infirmity of sense.

By mine honesty, If she be mad,--as I believe no other,-- Her madness hath the oddest frame of sense, Such a dependency of thing on thing, As e'er I heard in madness.

O gracious duke, Harp not on that, nor do not banish reason For inequality, but let your reason serve To make the truth appear where it seems hid, And hide the false seems true.

Many that are not mad Have, sure, more lack of reason.

I wish you now, then, Pray you, take note of it: and when you have A business for yourself, pray heaven you then Be perfect.

This gentleman told somewhat of my tale,-- It may be right, but you are i' the wrong To speak before your time.

Proceed. I went To this pernicious caitiff deputy,-- That's somewhat madly spoken.

This is most likely! O, that it were as like as it is true! By heaven, fond wretch, thou knowist not what thou speak'st, Or else thou art suborn'd against his honour In hateful practise.

Next, it imports no reason That with such vehemency he should pursue Faults proper to himself: if he had so offended, He would have weigh'd thy brother by himself And not have cut him off.

Some one hath set you on: Confess the truth, and say by whose advice Thou camest here to complain.

An officer! To prison with her! Shall we thus permit A blasting and a scandalous breath to fall On him so near us? This needs must be a practise.

Who knew of Your intent and coming hither? One that I would were here, Friar Lodowick.

Words against me? this is a good friar, belike! And to set on this wretched woman here Against our substitute! Let this friar be found.

But yesternight, my lord, she and that friar, I saw them at the prison: a saucy friar, A very scurvy fellow.

Blessed be your royal grace! I have stood by, my lord, and I have heard Your royal ear abused.

First, hath this woman Most wrongfully accused your substitute, Who is as free from touch or soil with her As she from one ungot.

Well, he in time may come to clear himself, But at this instant he is sick my lord, Of a strange fever.

First, for this woman. To justify this worthy nobleman, So vulgarly and personally accused, Her shall you hear disproved to her eyes, Till she herself confess it.

ISABELLA is carried off guarded, and MARIANA comes forward Do you not smile at this, Lord Angelo? O heaven, the vanity of wretched fools! Give us some seats.

Come, cousin Angelo, In this I'll be impartial, be you judge Of your own cause.

Is this the witness, friar? First, let her show her face, and after speak.

Pardon, my lord, I will not show my face Until my husband bid me.

Why, you are nothing then: neither maid, widow, nor wife? My lord, she may be a punk, for many of them are neither maid, widow, nor wife.

Silence that fellow: I would he had some cause To prattle for himself.

My lord, I do confess I ne'er was married, And I confess besides I am no maid: I have known my husband, yet my husband Knows not that ever he knew me.

For the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too! Well, my lord.

Why, just, my lord, and that is Angelo, Who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body, But knows he thinks that he knows Isabel's.

Let's see thy face. My husband bids me, now I will unmask.

I do perceive These poor informal women are no more But instruments of some more mightier member That sets them on: let me have way, my lord, To find this practise out.

Ay, with my heart And punish them to your height of pleasure.

There is another friar that set them on, Let him be sent for.

Would he were here, my lord! for he indeed Hath set the women on to this complaint: Your provost knows the place where he abides And he may fetch him.

We shall entreat you to abide here till he come and enforce them against him: we shall find this friar a notable fellow.

Call that same Isabel here once again, I would speak with her.

Pray you, my lord, give me leave to question, you shall see how I'll handle her.

Say you? Marry, sir, I think, if you handled her privately, she would sooner confess: perchance, publicly, she'll be ashamed.

Re-enter Officers with ISABELLA, and Provost with the DUKE VINCENTIO in his friar's habit Come on, mistress: here's a gentlewoman denies all that you have said.

My lord, here comes the rascal I spoke of, here with the provost.

In very good time: speak not you to him till we call upon you.

Come, sir: did you set these women on to slander Lord Angelo? they have confessed you did.

How! know you where you are? Respect to your great place! and let the devil Be sometime honour'd for his burning throne! Where is the duke? 'tis he should hear me speak.

The duke's in us, and we will hear you speak: Look you speak justly.

But, O, poor souls, Come you to seek the lamb here of the fox? Good night to your redress! Is the duke gone? Then is your cause gone too.

The duke's unjust, Thus to retort your manifest appeal, And put your trial in the villain's mouth Which here you come to accuse.

What 'unjust'! Be not so hot, the duke Dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he Dare rack his own: his subject am I not, Nor here provincial.

Slander to the state! Away with him to prison! What can you vouch against him, Signior Lucio? Is this the man that you did tell us of? 'Tis he, my lord.

Come hither, goodman baldpate: do you know me? I remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice: I met you at the prison, in the absence of the duke.

O, did you so? And do you remember what you said of the duke? Most notedly, sir.

O thou damnable fellow! Did not I pluck thee by the nose for thy speeches? I protest I love the duke as I love myself.

Hark, how the villain would close now, after his treasonable abuses! Such a fellow is not to be talked withal.

Away with him to prison! Where is the provost? Away with him to prison! lay bolts enough upon him: let him speak no more.

Away with those giglots too, and with the other confederate companion! What, resists he? Help him, Lucio.

To LUCIO Sneak not away, sir, for the friar and you Must have a word anon.

Lay hold on him. This may prove worse than hanging.

Hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence, That yet can do thee office? If thou hast, Rely upon it till my tale be heard, And hold no longer out.

O my dread lord, I should be guiltier than my guiltiness, To think I can be undiscernible, When I perceive your grace, like power divine, Hath look'd upon my passes.

Then, good prince, No longer session hold upon my shame, But let my trial be mine own confession: Immediate sentence then and sequent death Is all the grace I beg.

Say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman? I was, my lord.

Do you the office, friar, which consummate, Return him here again.

Go with him, provost. My lord, I am more amazed at his dishonour Than at the strangeness of it.

Your friar is now your prince: as I was then Advertising and holy to your business, Not changing heart with habit, I am still Attorney'd at your service.

O, give me pardon, That I, your vassal, have employ'd and pain'd Your unknown sovereignty! You are pardon'd, Isabel: And now, dear maid, be you as free to us.

O most kind maid, It was the swift celerity of his death, Which I did think with slower foot came on, That brain'd my purpose.

But, peace be with him! That life is better life, past fearing death, Than that which lives to fear: make it your comfort, So happy is your brother.

Then, Angelo, thy fault's thus manifested, Which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage.

We do condemn thee to the very block Where Claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste.

Away with him! O my most gracious lord, I hope you will not mock me with a husband.

O my dear lord, I crave no other, nor no better man.

Away with him to death! To LUCIO Now, sir, to you.

O my good lord! Sweet Isabel, take my part, Lend me your knees, and all my life to come I'll lend you all my life to do you service.

Against all sense you do importune her: Should she kneel down in mercy of this fact, Her brother's ghost his paved bed would break, And take her hence in horror.

Sweet Isabel, do yet but kneel by me, Hold up your hands, say nothing, I'll speak all.

They say, best men are moulded out of faults, And, for the most, become much more the better For being a little bad: so may my husband.

O Isabel, will you not lend a knee? He dies for Claudio's death.

Most bounteous sir, Look, if it please you, on this man condemn'd, As if my brother lived: I partly think A due sincerity govern'd his deeds, Till he did look on me: since it is so, Let him not die.

Provost, how came it Claudio was beheaded At an unusual hour? It was commanded so.

Had you a special warrant for the deed? No, my good lord, it was by private message.

For which I do discharge you of your office: Give up your keys.

I am sorry, one so learned and so wise As you, Lord Angelo, have still appear'd, Should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood.

I am sorry that such sorrow I procure: And so deep sticks it in my penitent heart That I crave death more willingly than mercy, 'Tis my deserving, and I do entreat it.

Re-enter Provost, with BARNARDINE, CLAUDIO muffled, and JULIET Which is that Barnardine? This, my lord.

That apprehends no further than this world, And squarest thy life according.

Thou'rt condemn'd: But, for those earthly faults, I quit them all, And pray thee take this mercy to provide For better times to come.

What muffled fellow's that? This is another prisoner that I saved.

Who should have died when Claudio lost his head, As like almost to Claudio as himself.

Unmuffles CLAUDIO Is he pardon'd, and, for your lovely sake, Give me your hand and say you will be mine.

By this Lord Angelo perceives he's safe, Methinks I see a quickening in his eye.

Well, Angelo, your evil quits you well: Look that you love your wife, her worth worth yours.

I find an apt remission in myself, And yet here's one in place I cannot pardon.

To LUCIO You, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward, One all of luxury, an ass, a madman, Wherein have I so deserved of you, That you extol me thus? 'Faith, my lord.

If you will hang me for it, you may, but I had rather it would please you I might be whipt.

I beseech your highness, do not marry me to a whore.

Your highness said even now, I made you a duke: good my lord, do not recompense me in making me a cuckold.

Thy slanders I forgive, and therewithal Remit thy other forfeits.

Take him to prison, And see our pleasure herein executed.

Marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death, whipping, and hanging.

Joy to you, Mariana! Love her, Angelo: I have confess'd her and I know her virtue.

Thanks, good friend Escalus, for thy much goodness: There's more behind that is more gratulate.

Thanks, provost, for thy care and secrecy: We shill employ thee in a worthier place.

Forgive him, Angelo, that brought you home The head of Ragozine for Claudio's: The offence pardons itself.

Dear Isabel, I have a motion much imports your good, Whereto if you'll a willing ear incline, What's mine is yours and what is yours is mine.

So, bring us to our palace, where we'll show What's yet behind, that's meet you all should know.

Believe me, sir, had I such venture forth, The better part of my affections would Be with my hopes abroad.

My wind cooling my broth Would blow me to an ague, when I thought What harm a wind too great at sea might do.

I should not see the sandy hour-glass run, But I should think of shallows and of flats, And see my wealthy Andrew dock'd in sand, Vailing her high-top lower than her ribs To kiss her burial.

Fie, fie! Not in love neither? Then let us say you are sad, Because you are not merry: and 'twere as easy For you to laugh and leap and say you are merry, Because you are not sad.

Here comes Bassanio, your most noble kinsman, Gratiano and Lorenzo.

Fare ye well: We leave you now with better company.

I would have stay'd till I had made you merry, If worthier friends had not prevented me.

I take it, your own business calls on you And you embrace the occasion to depart.

Good signiors both, when shall we laugh? say, when? You grow exceeding strange: must it be so? We'll make our leisures to attend on yours.

My Lord Bassanio, since you have found Antonio, We two will leave you: but at dinner-time, I pray you, have in mind where we must meet.

You look not well, Signior Antonio, You have too much respect upon the world: They lose it that do buy it with much care: Believe me, you are marvellously changed.

I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano, A stage where every man must play a part, And mine a sad one.

Let me play the fool: With mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come, And let my liver rather heat with wine Than my heart cool with mortifying groans.

I'll tell thee more of this another time: But fish not, with this melancholy bait, For this fool gudgeon, this opinion.

Fare ye well awhile: I'll end my exhortation after dinner.

Well, we will leave you then till dinner-time: I must be one of these same dumb wise men, For Gratiano never lets me speak.

Well, keep me company but two years moe, Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue.

Thanks, i' faith, for silence is only commendable In a neat's tongue dried and a maid not vendible.

Is that any thing now? Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more than any man in all Venice.

His reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff: you shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you have them, they are not worth the search.

To you, Antonio, I owe the most, in money and in love, And from your love I have a warranty To unburden all my plots and purposes How to get clear of all the debts I owe.

I pray you, good Bassanio, let me know it, And if it stand, as you yourself still do, Within the eye of honour, be assured, My purse, my person, my extremest means, Lie all unlock'd to your occasions.

Go, presently inquire, and so will I, Where money is, and I no question make To have it of my trust or for my sake.

By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary of this great world.

It is no mean happiness therefore, to be seated in the mean: superfluity comes sooner by white hairs, but competency lives longer.

If to do were as easy as to know what were good to do, chapels had been churches and poor men's cottages princes' palaces.

It is a good divine that follows his own instructions: I can easier teach twenty what were good to be done, than be one of the twenty to follow mine own teaching.

The brain may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper leaps o'er a cold decree: such a hare is madness the youth, to skip o'er the meshes of good counsel the cripple.

But this reasoning is not in the fashion to choose me a husband.

O me, the word 'choose!' I may neither choose whom I would nor refuse whom I dislike, so is the will of a living daughter curbed by the will of a dead father.

Ay, that's a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but talk of his horse, and he makes it a great appropriation to his own good parts, that he can shoe him himself.

I am much afeard my lady his mother played false with a smith.

I had rather be married to a death's-head with a bone in his mouth than to either of these.

God defend me from these How say you by the French lord, Monsieur Le Bon? God made him, and therefore let him pass for a man.

If he would despise me I would forgive him, for if he love me to madness, I shall never requite him.

If he should offer to choose, and choose the right casket, you should refuse to perform your father's will, if you should refuse to accept him.

Therefore, for fear of the worst, I pray thee, set a deep glass of rhenish wine on the contrary casket, for if the devil be within and that temptation without, I know he will choose it.

I will do any thing, Nerissa, ere I'll be married to a sponge.

If I live to be as old as Sibylla, I will die as chaste as Diana, unless I be obtained by the manner of my father's will.

I am glad this parcel of wooers are so reasonable, for there is not one among them but I dote on his very absence, and I pray God grant them a fair departure.

True, madam: he, of all the men that ever my foolish eyes looked upon, was the best deserving a fair lady.

I remember him well, and I remember him worthy of thy praise.

Sirrah, go before. Whiles we shut the gates upon one wooer, another knocks at the door.

For the which, as I told you, Antonio shall be bound.

May you stead me? will you pleasure me? shall I know your answer? Three thousand ducats for three months and Antonio bound.

Have you heard any imputation to the contrary? Oh, no, no, no, no: my meaning in saying he is a good man is to have you understand me that he is sufficient.

But ships are but boards, sailors but men: there be land-rats and water-rats, water-thieves and land-thieves, I mean pirates, and then there is the peril of waters, winds and rocks.

Three thousand ducats, I think I may take his bond.

I will be assured I may, and, that I may be assured, I will bethink me.

May I speak with Antonio? If it please you to dine with us.

Yes, to smell pork, to eat of the habitation which your prophet the Nazarite conjured the devil into.

I will buy with you, sell with you, talk with you, walk with you, and so following, but I will not eat with you, drink with you, nor pray with you.

What news on the Rialto? Who is he comes here? This is Signior Antonio.

I hate him for he is a Christian, But more for that in low simplicity He lends out money gratis and brings down The rate of usance here with us in Venice.

If I can catch him once upon the hip, I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.

He hates our sacred nation, and he rails, Even there where merchants most do congregate, On me, my bargains and my well-won thrift, Which he calls interest.

Cursed be my tribe, If I forgive him! Shylock, do you hear? I am debating of my present store, And, by the near guess of my memory, I cannot instantly raise up the gross Of full three thousand ducats.

What of that? Tubal, a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe, Will furnish me.

But soft! how many months Do you desire? To ANTONIO Rest you fair, good signior, Your worship was the last man in our mouths.

Shylock, although I neither lend nor borrow By taking nor by giving of excess, Yet, to supply the ripe wants of my friend, I'll break a custom.

Is he yet possess'd How much ye would? Ay, ay, three thousand ducats.

Well then, your bond, and let me see, but hear you, Methought you said you neither lend nor borrow Upon advantage.

This was a way to thrive, and he was blest: And thrift is blessing, if men steal it not.

This was a venture, sir, that Jacob served for, A thing not in his power to bring to pass, But sway'd and fashion'd by the hand of heaven.

Was this inserted to make interest good? Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams? I cannot tell, I make it breed as fast: But note me, signior.

Mark you this, Bassanio, The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose.

An evil soul producing holy witness Is like a villain with a smiling cheek, A goodly apple rotten at the heart: O, what a goodly outside falsehood hath! Three thousand ducats, 'tis a good round sum.

You call me misbeliever, cut-throat dog, And spit upon my Jewish gaberdine, And all for use of that which is mine own.

Content, i' faith: I'll seal to such a bond And say there is much kindness in the Jew.

You shall not seal to such a bond for me: I'll rather dwell in my necessity.

Why, fear not, man, I will not forfeit it: Within these two months, that's a month before This bond expires, I do expect return Of thrice three times the value of this bond.

I say, To buy his favour, I extend this friendship: If he will take it, so, if not, adieu, And, for my love, I pray you wrong me not.

Come on: in this there can be no dismay, My ships come home a month before the day.

Enter the PRINCE OF MOROCCO  and his train, PORTIA, NERISSA, and others attending Mislike me not for my complexion, The shadow'd livery of the burnish'd sun, To whom I am a neighbour and near bred.

Bring me the fairest creature northward born, Where Phoebus' fire scarce thaws the icicles, And let us make incision for your love, To prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine.

Even for that I thank you: Therefore, I pray you, lead me to the caskets To try my fortune.

You must take your chance, And either not attempt to choose at all Or swear before you choose, if you choose wrong Never to speak to lady afterward In way of marriage: therefore be advised.

Come, bring me unto my chance. First, forward to the temple: after dinner Your hazard shall be made.

Good fortune then! To make me blest or cursed'st among men.

Cornets, and exeunt Certainly my conscience will serve me to run from this Jew my master.

The fiend is at mine elbow and tempts me saying to me 'Gobbo, Launcelot Gobbo, good Launcelot,' or 'good Gobbo,' or good Launcelot Gobbo, use your legs, take the start, run away.

My conscience says 'No, take heed,' honest Launcelot, take heed, honest Gobbo, or, as aforesaid, 'honest Launcelot Gobbo, do not run, scorn running with thy heels.

Well, the most courageous fiend bids me pack: 'Via!' says the fiend, 'away!' says the fiend, 'for the heavens, rouse up a brave mind,' says the fiend, 'and run.

Certainly the Jew is the very devil incarnal, and, in my conscience, my conscience is but a kind of hard conscience, to offer to counsel me to stay with the Jew.

The fiend gives the more friendly counsel: I will run, fiend, my heels are at your command, I will run.

Master young man, you, I pray you, which is the way to master Jew's? who, being more than sand-blind, high-gravel blind, knows me not: I will try confusions with him.

Can you tell me whether one Launcelot, that dwells with him, dwell with him or no? Talk you of young Master Launcelot? Mark me now, now will I raise the waters.

Talk you of young Master Launcelot? No master, sir, but a poor man's son: his father, though I say it, is an honest exceeding poor man and, God be thanked, well to live.

Well, let his father be what a' will, we talk of young Master Launcelot.

But I pray you, ergo, old man, ergo, I beseech you, talk you of young Master Launcelot? Of Launcelot, an't please your mastership.

Marry, God forbid! the boy was the very staff of my age, my very prop.

Nay, indeed, if you had your eyes, you might fail of the knowing me: it is a wise father that knows his own child.

Well, old man, I will tell you news of your son: give me your blessing: truth will come to light, murder cannot be hid long, a man's son may, but at the length truth will out.

Pray you, sir, stand up: I am sure you are not Launcelot, my boy.

Pray you, let's have no more fooling about it, but give me your blessing: I am Launcelot, your boy that was, your son that is, your child that shall I cannot think you are my son.

I know not what I shall think of that: but I am Launcelot, the Jew's man, and I am sure Margery your wife is my mother.

Her name is Margery, indeed: I'll be sworn, if thou be Launcelot, thou art mine own flesh and blood.

Lord worshipped might he be! what a beard hast thou got! thou hast got more hair on thy chin than Dobbin my fill-horse has on his tail.

It should seem, then, that Dobbin's tail grows backward: I am sure he had more hair of his tail than I have of my face when I last saw him.

Lord, how art thou changed! How dost thou and thy master agree? I have brought him a present.

How 'gree you now? Well, well: but, for mine own part, as I have set up my rest to run away, so I will not rest till I have run some ground.

My master's a very Jew: give him a present! give him a halter: I am famished in his service, you may tell every finger I have with my ribs.

Father, I am glad you are come: give me your present to one Master Bassanio, who, indeed, gives rare new liveries: if I serve not him, I will run as far as God has any ground.

O rare fortune! here comes the man: to him, father, for I am a Jew, if I serve the Jew any longer.

You may do so, but let it be so hasted that supper be ready at the farthest by five of the clock.

See these letters delivered, put the liveries to making, and desire Gratiano to come anon to my lodging.

The old proverb is very well parted between my master Shylock and you, sir: you have the grace of God, sir, and he hath enough.

Go, father, with thy son. Take leave of thy old master and inquire My lodging out.

Give him a livery More guarded than his fellows': see it done.

I cannot get a service, no, I have ne'er a tongue in my head.

Well, if any man in Italy have a fairer table which doth offer to swear upon a book, I shall have good fortune.

Well, if Fortune be a woman, she's a good wench for this gear.

Father, come, I'll take my leave of the Jew in the twinkling of an eye.

I pray thee, good Leonardo, think on this: These things being bought and orderly bestow'd, Return in haste, for I do feast to-night My best-esteem'd acquaintance: hie thee, go.

You must not deny me: I must go with you to Belmont.

Pray thee, take pain To allay with some cold drops of modesty Thy skipping spirit, lest through thy wild behavior I be misconstrued in the place I go to, And lose my hopes.

Nay, but I bar to-night: you shall not gauge me By what we do to-night.

No, that were pity: I would entreat you rather to put on Your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends That purpose merriment.

And I must to Lorenzo and the rest: But we will visit you at supper-time.

I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so: Our house is hell, and thou, a merry devil, Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness.

Most beautiful pagan, most sweet Jew! if a Christian did not play the knave and get thee, I am much deceived.

But, adieu: these foolish drops do something drown my manly spirit: adieu.

Alack, what heinous sin is it in me To be ashamed to be my father's child! But though I am a daughter to his blood, I am not to his manners.

O Lorenzo, If thou keep promise, I shall end this strife, Become a Christian and thy loving wife.

Nay, we will slink away in supper-time, Disguise us at my lodging and return, All in an hour.

'Tis vile, unless it may be quaintly order'd, And better in my mind not undertook.

'Tis now but four o'clock: we have two hours To furnish us.

Friend Launcelot, what's the news? An it shall please you to break up this, it shall seem to signify.

I know the hand: in faith, 'tis a fair hand, And whiter than the paper it writ on Is the fair hand that writ.

Whither goest thou? Marry, sir, to bid my old master the Jew to sup to-night with my new master the Christian.

Hold here, take this: tell gentle Jessica I will not fail her, speak it privately.

Go, gentlemen, Will you prepare you for this masque tonight? I am provided of a torch-bearer.

Meet me and Gratiano At Gratiano's lodging some hour hence.

Was not that letter from fair Jessica? I must needs tell thee all.

She hath directed How I shall take her from her father's house, What gold and jewels she is furnish'd with, What page's suit she hath in readiness.

Come, go with me, peruse this as thou goest: Fair Jessica shall be my torch-beare r.

Your worship was wont to tell me that I could do nothing without bidding.

Call you? what is your will? I am bid forth to supper, Jessica: There are my keys.

But wherefore should I go? I am not bid for love, they flatter me: But yet I'll go in hate, to feed upon The prodigal Christian.

I am right loath to go: There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest, For I did dream of money-bags to-night.

I beseech you, sir, go: my young master doth expect your reproach.

By Jacob's staff, I swear, I have no mind of feasting forth to-night: But I will go.

Mistress, look out at window, for all this, There will come a Christian boy, will be worth a Jewess' eye.

What says that fool of Hagar's offspring, ha? His words were 'Farewell mistress,' nothing else.

Well, Jessica, go in, Perhaps I will return immediately: Do as I bid you, shut doors after you: Fast bind, fast find, A proverb never stale in thrifty mind.

Farewell, and if my fortune be not crost, I have a father, you a daughter, lost.

This is the pent-house under which Lorenzo Desired us to make stand.

And it is marvel he out-dwells his hour, For lovers ever run before the clock.

Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode, Not I, but my affairs, have made you wait: When you shall please to play the thieves for wives, I'll watch as long for you then.

Ho! who's within? Who are you? Tell me, for more certainty, Albeit I'll swear that I do know your tongue.

Lorenzo, certain, and my love indeed, For who love I so much? And now who knows But you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours? Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.

What, must I hold a candle to my shames? They in themselves, good-sooth, are too too light.

Why, 'tis an office of discovery, love, And I should be obscured.

So are you, sweet, Even in the lovely garnish of a boy.

But come at once, For the close night doth play the runaway, And we are stay'd for at Bassanio's feast.

I will make fast the doors, and gild myself With some more ducats, and be with you straight.

What, art thou come? On, gentlemen, away! Our masquing mates by this time for us stay.

Who's there? Signior Antonio! Fie, fie, Gratiano! where are all the rest? 'Tis nine o'clock: our friends all stay for you.

No masque to-night: the wind is come about, Bassanio presently will go aboard: I have sent twenty out to seek for you.

I am glad on't: I desire no more delight Than to be under sail and gone to-night.

Enter PORTIA, with the PRINCE OF MOROCCO, and their trains Go draw aside the curtains and discover The several caskets to this noble prince.

How shall I know if I do choose the right? The one of them contains my picture, prince: If you choose that, then I am yours withal.

Some god direct my judgment! Let me see, I will survey the inscriptions back again.

What says this leaden casket? 'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.

Must give: for what? for lead? hazard for lead? This casket threatens.

Men that hazard all Do it in hope of fair advantages: A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross, I'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead.

What says the silver with her virgin hue? 'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.

As much as I deserve! Why, that's the lady: I do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes, In graces and in qualities of breeding, But more than these, in love I do deserve.

What if I stray'd no further, but chose here? Let's see once more this saying graved in gold 'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.

Is't like that lead contains her? 'Twere damnation To think so base a thought: it were too gross To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave.

Or shall I think in silver she's immured, Being ten times undervalued to tried gold? O sinful thought! Never so rich a gem Was set in worse than gold.

They have in England A coin that bears the figure of an angel Stamped in gold, but that's insculp'd upon, But here an angel in a golden bed Lies all within.

Deliver me the key: Here do I choose, and thrive I as I may! There, take it, prince, and if my form lie there, Then I am yours.

He unlocks the golden casket O hell! what have we here? A carrion Death, within whose empty eye There is a written scroll! I'll read the writing.

All that glitters is not gold, Often have you heard that told: Many a man his life hath sold But my outside to behold: Gilded tombs do worms enfold.

Had you been as wise as bold, Young in limbs, in judgment old, Your answer had not been inscroll'd: Fare you well, your suit is cold.

Cold, indeed, and labour lost: Then, farewell, heat, and welcome, frost! Portia, adieu.

I have too grieved a heart To take a tedious leave: thus losers part.

Draw the curtains, go. Let all of his complexion choose me so.

Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail: With him is Gratiano gone along, And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not.

The villain Jew with outcries raised the duke, Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship.

Why, all the boys in Venice follow him, Crying, his stones, his daughter, and his ducats.

Let good Antonio look he keep his day, Or he shall pay for this.

You were best to tell Antonio what you hear, Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.

I pray thee, let us go and find him out And quicken his embraced heaviness With some delight or other.

Quick, quick, I pray thee, draw the curtain straight: The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath, And comes to his election presently.

To these injunctions every one doth swear That comes to hazard for my worthless self.

Fortune now To my heart's hope! Gold, silver, and base lead.

'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.

What says the golden chest? ha! let me see: 'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.

I will not choose what many men desire, Because I will not jump with common spirits And rank me with the barbarous multitudes.

Give me a key for this, And instantly unlock my fortunes here.

He opens the silver casket Too long a pause for that which you find there.

What's here? the portrait of a blinking idiot, Presenting me a schedule! I will read it.

How much unlike art thou to Portia! How much unlike my hopes and my deservings! 'Who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves.

Did I deserve no more than a fool's head? Is that my prize? are my deserts no better? To offend, and judge, are distinct offices And of opposed natures.

What is here? The fire seven times tried this: Seven times tried that judgment is, That did never choose amiss.

Some there be that shadows kiss, Such have but a shadow's bliss: There be fools alive, I wis, Silver'd o'er, and so was this.

Take what wife you will to bed, I will ever be your head: So be gone: you are sped.

Still more fool I shall appear By the time I linger here With one fool's head I came to woo, But I go away with two.

O, these deliberate fools! when they do choose, They have the wisdom by their wit to lose.

The ancient saying is no heresy, Hanging and wiving goes by destiny.

Yet I have not seen So likely an ambassador of love: A day in April never came so sweet, To show how costly summer was at hand, As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord.

No more, I pray thee: I am half afeard Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee, Thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him.

Come, come, Nerissa, for I long to see Quick Cupid's post that comes so mannerly.

I would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knapped ginger or made her neighbours believe she wept for the death of a third husband.

Ha! what sayest thou? Why, the end is, he hath lost a ship.

Let me say 'amen' betimes, lest the devil cross my prayer, for here he comes in the likeness of a Jew.

How now, Shylock! what news among the merchants? You know, none so well, none so well as you, of my daughter's flight.

That's certain: I, for my part, knew the tailor that made the wings she flew withal.

And Shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was fledged, and then it is the complexion of them all to leave the dam.

My own flesh and blood to rebel! Out upon it, old carrion! rebels it at these years? I say, my daughter is my flesh and blood.

There is more difference between thy flesh and hers than between jet and ivory, more between your bloods than there is between red wine and rhenish.

Why, I am sure, if he forfeit, thou wilt not take his flesh: what's that good for? To bait fish withal: if it will feed nothing else, it will feed my revenge.

If a Jew wrong a Christian, what is his humility? Revenge.

If a Christian wrong a Jew, what should his sufferance be by Christian example? Why, revenge.

The villany you teach me, I will execute, and it shall go hard but I will better the instruction.

Gentlemen, my master Antonio is at his house and desires to speak with you both.

Here comes another of the tribe: a third cannot be matched, unless the devil himself turn Jew.

How now, Tubal! what news from Genoa? hast thou found my daughter? I often came where I did hear of her, but cannot find her.

Yes, other men have ill luck too: Antonio, as I heard in Genoa,-- What, what, what? ill luck, ill luck? Hath an argosy cast away, coming from Tripolis.

Is't true, is't true? I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wreck.

I thank thee, good Tubal: good news, good news! ha, ha! where? in Genoa? Your daughter spent in Genoa, as I heard, in one night fourscore ducats.

I am very glad of it: I'll plague him, I'll torture him: I am glad of it.

One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter for a monkey.

Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal: it was my turquoise, I had it of Leah when I was a bachelor: I would not have given it for a wilderness of monkeys.

Go, Tubal, fee me an officer, bespeak him a fortnight before.

I will have the heart of him, if he forfeit, for, were he out of Venice, I can make what merchandise I will.

Go, go, Tubal, and meet me at our synagogue, go, good Tubal, at our synagogue, Tubal.

I pray you, tarry: pause a day or two Before you hazard, for, in choosing wrong, I lose your company: therefore forbear awhile.

There's something tells me, but it is not love, I would not lose you, and you know yourself, Hate counsels not in such a quality.

But lest you should not understand me well,-- And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought,-- I would detain you here some month or two Before you venture for me.

I could teach you How to choose right, but I am then forsworn, So will I never be: so may you miss me, But if you do, you'll make me wish a sin, That I had been forsworn.

Beshrew your eyes, They have o'erlook'd me and divided me, One half of me is yours, the other half yours, Mine own, I would say, but if mine, then yours, And so all yours.

O, these naughty times Put bars between the owners and their rights! And so, though yours, not yours.

Prove it so, Let fortune go to hell for it, not I.

I speak too long, but 'tis to peize the time, To eke it and to draw it out in length, To stay you from election.

Upon the rack, Bassanio! then confess What treason there is mingled with your love.

None but that ugly treason of mistrust, Which makes me fear the enjoying of my love: There may as well be amity and life 'Tween snow and fire, as treason and my love.

Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack, Where men enforced do speak anything.

'Confess' and 'love' Had been the very sum of my confession: O happy torment, when my torturer Doth teach me answers for deliverance! But let me to my fortune and the caskets.

Away, then! I am lock'd in one of them: If you do love me, you will find me out.

Go, Hercules! Live thou, I live: with much, much more dismay I view the fight than thou that makest the fray.

Music, whilst BASSANIO comments on the caskets to himself Tell me where is fancy bred, Or in the heart, or in the head? How begot, how nourished? Reply, reply.

It is engender'd in the eyes, With gazing fed, and fancy dies In the cradle where it lies.

Let us all ring fancy's knell I'll begin it,--Ding, dong, bell.

So may the outward shows be least themselves: The world is still deceived with ornament.

Thus ornament is but the guiled shore To a most dangerous sea, the beauteous scarf Veiling an Indian beauty, in a word, The seeming truth which cunning times put on To entrap the wisest.

I feel too much thy blessing: make it less, For fear I surfeit.

Yet look, how far The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow In underprizing it, so far this shadow Doth limp behind the substance.

Here's the scroll, The continent and summary of my fortune.

Fair lady, by your leave, I come by note, to give and to receive.

My eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours: You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid, You loved, I loved for intermission.

Is this true, Nerissa? Madam, it is, so you stand pleased withal.

And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith? Yes, faith, my lord.

Our feast shall be much honour'd in your marriage.

We'll play with them the first boy for a thousand ducats.

What, and stake down? No, we shall ne'er win at that sport, and stake down.

But who comes here? Lorenzo and his infidel? What, and my old Venetian friend Salerio? Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither, If that the youth of my new interest here Have power to bid you welcome.

By your leave, I bid my very friends and countrymen, Sweet Portia, welcome.

For my part, my lord, My purpose was not to have seen you here, But meeting with Salerio by the way, He did entreat me, past all saying nay, To come with him along.

Gives Bassanio a letter Ere I ope his letter, I pray you, tell me how my good friend doth.

Not sick, my lord, unless it be in mind, Nor well, unless in mind: his letter there Will show you his estate.

Your hand, Salerio: what's the news from Venice? How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio? I know he will be glad of our success, We are the Jasons, we have won the fleece.

What, worse and worse! With leave, Bassanio: I am half yourself, And I must freely have the half of anything That this same paper brings you.

Here is a letter, lady, The paper as the body of my friend, And every word in it a gaping wound, Issuing life-blood.

Besides, it should appear, that if he had The present money to discharge the Jew, He would not take it.

What sum owes he the Jew? For me three thousand ducats.

What, no more? Pay him six thousand, and deface the bond, Double six thousand, and then treble that, Before a friend of this description Shall lose a hair through Bassanio's fault.

First go with me to church and call me wife, And then away to Venice to your friend, For never shall you lie by Portia's side With an unquiet soul.

You shall have gold To pay the petty debt twenty times over: When it is paid, bring your true friend along.

My maid Nerissa and myself meantime Will live as maids and widows.

Come, away! For you shall hence upon your wedding-day: Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer: Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear.

Notwithstanding, use your pleasure: if your love do not persuade you to come, let not my letter.

Gaoler, look to him: tell not me of mercy, This is the fool that lent out money gratis: Gaoler, look to him.

I'll have my bond, speak not against my bond: I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond.

Thou call'dst me dog before thou hadst a cause, But, since I am a dog, beware my fangs: The duke shall grant me justice.

I do wonder, Thou naughty gaoler, that thou art so fond To come abroad with him at his request.

I'll have my bond, I will not hear thee speak: I'll have my bond, and therefore speak no more.

I'll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool, To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield To Christian intercessors.

Follow not, I'll have no speaking: I will have my bond.

It is the most impenetrable cur That ever kept with men.

Let him alone: I'll follow him no more with bootless prayers.

He seeks my life, his reason well I know: I oft deliver'd from his forfeitures Many that have at times made moan to me, Therefore he hates me.

I am sure the duke Will never grant this forfeiture to hold.

Therefore, go: These griefs and losses have so bated me, That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh To-morrow to my bloody creditor.

I do desire you Not to deny this imposition, The which my love and some necessity Now lays upon you.

Madam, with all my heart, I shall obey you in all fair commands.

My people do already know my mind, And will acknowledge you and Jessica In place of Lord Bassanio and myself.

Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you! I wish your ladyship all heart's content.

I thank you for your wish, and am well pleased To wish it back on you: fare you well Jessica.

Now, Balthasar, As I have ever found thee honest-true, So let me find thee still.

Waste no time in words, But get thee gone: I shall be there before thee.

Come on, Nerissa, I have work in hand That you yet know not of: we'll see our husbands Before they think of us.

Shall they see us? They shall, Nerissa, but in such a habit, That they shall think we are accomplished With that we lack.

I have within my mind A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Jacks, Which I will practise.

Yes, truly, for, look you, the sins of the father are to be laid upon the children: therefore, I promise ye, I fear you.

I was always plain with you, and so now I speak my agitation of the matter: therefore be of good cheer, for truly I think you are damned.

There is but one hope in it that can do you any good, and that is but a kind of bastard hope neither.

And what hope is that, I pray thee? Marry, you may partly hope that your father got you not, that you are not the Jew's daughter.

That were a kind of bastard hope, indeed: so the sins of my mother should be visited upon me.

Truly then I fear you are damned both by father and mother: thus when I shun Scylla, your father, I fall into Charybdis, your mother: well, you are gone both ways.

I shall be saved by my husband, he hath made me a Truly, the more to blame he: we were Christians enow before, e'en as many as could well live, one by another.

This making Christians will raise the price of hogs: if we grow all to be pork-eaters, we shall not shortly have a rasher on the coals for money.

I'll tell my husband, Launcelot, what you say: here he comes.

I shall grow jealous of you shortly, Launcelot, if you thus get my wife into corners.

Nay, you need not fear us, Lorenzo: Launcelot and I are out.

I shall answer that better to the commonwealth than you can the getting up of the negro's belly: the Moor is with child by you, Launcelot.

It is much that the Moor should be more than reason: but if she be less than an honest woman, she is indeed more than I took her for.

How every fool can play upon the word! I think the best grace of wit will shortly turn into silence, and discourse grow commendable in none only but parrots.

Go in, sirrah, bid them prepare for dinner. That is done, sir, they have all stomachs.

Goodly Lord, what a wit-snapper are you! then bid them prepare dinner.

Will you cover then, sir? Not so, sir, neither, I know my duty.

For the table, sir, it shall be served in, for the meat, sir, it shall be covered, for your coming in to dinner, sir, why, let it be as humours and conceits shall govern.

How cheerest thou, Jessica? And now, good sweet, say thy opinion, How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio's wife? Past all expressing.

Even such a husband Hast thou of me as she is for a wife.

No, pray thee, let it serve for table-talk, '	Then, howso'er thou speak'st, 'mong other things I shall digest it.

What, is Antonio here? Ready, so please your grace.

I am sorry for thee: thou art come to answer A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch uncapable of pity, void and empty From any dram of mercy.

Are you answer'd? This is no answer, thou unfeeling man, To excuse the current of thy cruelty.

Do all men kill the things they do not love? Hates any man the thing he would not kill? Every offence is not a hate at first.

What judgment shall I dread, doing Were in six parts and every part a ducat, I would not draw them, I would have my bond.

If you deny me, fie upon your law! There is no force in the decrees of Venice.

I stand for judgment: answer, shall I have it? Upon my power I may dismiss this court, Unless Bellario, a learned doctor, Whom I have sent for to determine this, Come here to-day.

My lord, here stays without A messenger with letters from the doctor, New come from Padua.

Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet! The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones and all, Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood.

Came you from Padua, from Bellario? From both, my lord.

Bellario greets your grace. Presenting a letter Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly? To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there.

Not on thy sole, but on thy soul, harsh Jew, Thou makest thy knife keen, but no metal can, No, not the hangman's axe, bear half the keenness Of thy sharp envy.

Can no prayers pierce thee? No, none that thou hast wit enough to make.

O, be thou damn'd, inexecrable dog! And for thy life let justice be accused.

Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond, Thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud: Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall To cureless ruin.

I stand here for law. This letter from Bellario doth commend A young and learned doctor to our court.

Where is he? He attendeth here hard by, To know your answer, whether you'll admit him.

Some three or four of you Go give him courteous conduct to this place.

I beseech you, let his lack of years be no impediment to let him lack a reverend estimation, for I never knew so young a body with so old a head.

I leave him to your gracious acceptance, whose trial shall better publish his You hear the learn'd Bellario, what he writes: And here, I take it, is the doctor come.

Are you acquainted with the difference That holds this present question in the court? I am informed thoroughly of the cause.

Which is the merchant here, and which the Jew? Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth.

Of a strange nature is the suit you follow, Yet in such rule that the Venetian law Cannot impugn you as you do proceed.

You stand within his danger, do you not? Ay, so he says.

I have spoke thus much To mitigate the justice of thy plea, Which if thou follow, this strict court of Venice Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant there.

My deeds upon my head! I crave the law, The penalty and forfeit of my bond.

And I beseech you, Wrest once the law to your authority: To do a great right, do a little wrong, And curb this cruel devil of his will.

It must not be, there is no power in Venice Can alter a decree established: 'Twill be recorded for a precedent, And many an error by the same example Will rush into the state: it cannot be.

A Daniel come to judgment! yea, a Daniel! O wise young judge, how I do honour thee! I pray you, let me look upon the bond.

An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven: Shall I lay perjury upon my soul? No, not for Venice.

Why, this bond is forfeit, And lawfully by this the Jew may claim A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off Nearest the merchant's heart.

Be merciful: Take thrice thy money, bid me tear the bond.

Most heartily I do beseech the court To give the judgment.

Why then, thus it is: You must prepare your bosom for his knife.

O noble judge! O excellent young man! For the intent and purpose of the law Hath full relation to the penalty, Which here appeareth due upon the bond.

'Tis very true: O wise and upright judge! How much more elder art thou than thy looks! Therefore lay bare your bosom.

Ay, his breast: So says the bond: doth it not, noble judge? 'Nearest his heart:' those are the very words.

Are there balance here to weigh The flesh? I have them ready.

Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge, To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death.

Is it so nominated in the bond? It is not so express'd: but what of that? 'Twere good you do so much for charity.

You, merchant, have you any thing to say? But little: I am arm'd and well prepared.

Repent but you that you shall lose your friend, And he repents not that he pays your debt, For if the Jew do cut but deep enough, I'll pay it presently with all my heart.

Your wife would give you little thanks for that, If she were by, to hear you make the offer.

I have a wife, whom, I protest, I love: I would she were in heaven, so she could Entreat some power to change this currish Jew.

'Tis well you offer it behind her back, The wish would make else an unquiet house.

I have a daughter, Would any of the stock of Barrabas Had been her husband rather than a Christian! We trifle time: I pray thee, pursue sentence.

A pound of that same merchant's flesh is thine: The court awards it, and the law doth give it.

Most rightful judge! And you must cut this flesh from off his breast: The law allows it, and the court awards it.

Most learned judge! A sentence! Come, prepare! Tarry a little, there is something else.

O upright judge! Mark, Jew: O learned judge! Is that the law? Thyself shalt see the act: For, as thou urgest justice, be assured Thou shalt have justice, more than thou desirest.

O learned judge! Mark, Jew: a learned judge! I take this offer, then, pay the bond thrice And let the Christian go.

The Jew shall have all justice, soft! no haste: He shall have nothing but the penalty.

O Jew! an upright judge, a learned judge! Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh.

A second Daniel, a Daniel, Jew! Now, infidel, I have you on the hip.

He hath refused it in the open court: He shall have merely justice and his bond.

A Daniel, still say I, a second Daniel! I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word.

Shall I not have barely my principal? Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture, To be so taken at thy peril, Jew.

Why, then the devil give him good of it! I'll stay no longer question.

Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself: And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state, Thou hast not left the value of a cord, Therefore thou must be hang'd at the state's charge.

Nay, take my life and all, pardon not that: You take my house when you do take the prop That doth sustain my house, you take my life When you do take the means whereby I live.

What mercy can you render him, Antonio? A halter gratis, nothing else, for God's sake.

He shall do this, or else I do recant The pardon that I late pronounced here.

Art thou contented, Jew? what dost thou say? I am content.

I pray you, give me leave to go from hence, I am not well: send the deed after me, And I will sign it.

In christening shalt thou have two god-fathers: Had I been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more, To bring thee to the gallows, not the font.

I humbly do desire your grace of pardon: I must away this night toward Padua, And it is meet I presently set forth.

Antonio, gratify this gentleman, For, in my mind, you are much bound to him.

And stand indebted, over and above, In love and service to you evermore.

He is well paid that is well satisfied, And I, delivering you, am satisfied And therein do account myself well paid: My mind was never yet more mercenary.

I pray you, know me when we meet again: I wish you well, and so I take my leave.

Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further: Take some remembrance of us, as a tribute, Not as a fee: grant me two things, I pray you, Not to deny me, and to pardon me.

This ring, good sir, alas, it is a trifle! I will not shame myself to give you this.

I will have nothing else but only this, And now methinks I have a mind to it.

The dearest ring in Venice will I give you, And find it out by proclamation: Only for this, I pray you, pardon me.

I see, sir, you are liberal in offers You taught me first to beg, and now methinks You teach me how a beggar should be answer'd.

Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife, And when she put it on, she made me vow That I should neither sell nor give nor lose it.

An if your wife be not a mad-woman, And know how well I have deserved the ring, She would not hold out enemy for ever, For giving it to me.

Well, peace be with you! My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring: Let his deservings and my love withal Be valued against your wife's commandment.

Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him, Give him the ring, and bring him, if thou canst, Unto Antonio's house: away! make haste.

Come, you and I will thither presently, And in the morning early will we both Fly toward Belmont: come, Antonio.

Inquire the Jew's house out, give him this deed And let him sign it: we'll away to-night And be a day before our husbands home: This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo.

Fair sir, you are well o'erta'en My Lord Bassanio upon more advice Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat Your company at dinner.

That cannot be: His ring I do accept most thankfully: And so, I pray you, tell him: furthermore, I pray you, show my youth old Shylock's house.

Aside to PORTIA I'll see if I can get my husband's ring, Which I did make him swear to keep for ever.

We shall have old swearing That they did give the rings away to men, But we'll outface them, and outswear them too.

Away! make haste: thou knowist where I will tarry.

In such a night Did Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew And saw the lion's shadow ere himself And ran dismay'd away.

In such a night Stood Dido with a willow in her hand Upon the wild sea banks and waft her love To come again to Carthage.

In such a night Medea gather'd the enchanted herbs That did renew old AEson.

In such a night Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew And with an unthrift love did run from Venice As far as Belmont.

In such a night Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well, Stealing her soul with many vows of faith And ne'er a true one.

In such a night Did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew, Slander her love, and he forgave it her.

I would out-night you, did no body come, But, hark, I hear the footing of a man.

Who comes so fast in silence of the night? A friend.

Who comes with her? None but a holy hermit and her maid.

I pray you, is my master yet return'd? He is not, nor we have not heard from him.

But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica, And ceremoniously let us prepare Some welcome for the mistress of the house.

Sola, sola! wo ha, ho! sola, sola! Who calls? Sola! did you see Master Lorenzo? Master Lorenzo, sola, sola! Leave hollaing, man: here.

Sola! where? where? Tell him there's a post come from my master, with his horn full of good news: my master will be here ere morning.

Sweet soul, let's in, and there expect their coming.

And yet no matter: why should we go in? My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you, Within the house, your mistress is at hand, And bring your music forth into the air.

How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank! Here will we sit and let the sounds of music Creep in our ears: soft stillness and the night Become the touches of sweet harmony.

Come, ho! and wake Diana with a hymn! With sweetest touches pierce your mistress' ear, And draw her home with music.

Mark the music. That light we see is burning in my hall.

How far that little candle throws his beams! So shines a good deed in a naughty world.

So doth the greater glory dim the less: A substitute shines brightly as a king Unto the king be by, and then his state Empties itself, as doth an inland brook Into the main of waters.

Music! hark! It is your music, madam, of the house.

Nothing is good, I see, without respect: Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.

How many things by season season'd are To their right praise and true perfection! Peace, ho! the moon sleeps with Endymion And would not be awaked.

Music ceases That is the voice, Or I am much deceived, of Portia.

He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo, By the bad voice.

We have been praying for our husbands' healths, Which speed, we hope, the better for our words.

Are they return'd? Madam, they are not yet, But there is come a messenger before, To signify their coming.

Go in, Nerissa, Give order to my servants that they take No note at all of our being absent hence, Nor you, Lorenzo, Jessica, nor you.

A tucket sounds Your husband is at hand, I hear his trumpet: We are no tell-tales, madam, fear you not.

This night methinks is but the daylight sick, It looks a little paler: 'tis a day, Such as the day is when the sun is hid.

We should hold day with the Antipodes, If you would walk in absence of the sun.

Let me give light, but let me not be light, For a light wife doth make a heavy husband, And never be Bassanio so for me: But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord.

Give welcome to my friend. This is the man, this is Antonio, To whom I am so infinitely bound.

Sir, you are very welcome to our house: It must appear in other ways than words, Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.

In faith, I gave it to the judge's clerk: Would he were gelt that had it, for my part, Since you do take it, love, so much at heart.

A quarrel, ho, already! what's the matter? About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring That she did give me, whose posy was For all the world like cutler's poetry Upon  a knife, 'Love me, and leave me not.

Gave it a judge's clerk! no, God's my judge, The clerk will ne'er wear hair on's face that had it.

Now, by this hand, I gave it to a youth, A kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy, No higher than thyself, the judge's clerk, A prating boy, that begg'd it as a fee: I could not for my heart deny it him.

You were to blame, I must be plain with you, To part so slightly with your wife's first gift: A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.

I gave my love a ring and made him swear Never to part with it, and here he stands, I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it Nor pluck it from his finger, for the wealth That the world masters.

Now, in faith, Gratiano, You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief: An 'twere to me, I should be mad at it.

What ring gave you my lord? Not that, I hope, which you received of me.

If I could add a lie unto a fault, I would deny it, but you see my finger Hath not the ring upon it, it is gone.

By heaven, I will ne'er come in your bed Until I see the ring.

If you had known the virtue of the ring, Or half her worthiness that gave the ring, Or your own honour to contain the ring, You would not then have parted with the ring.

What should I say, sweet lady? I was enforced to send it after him, I was beset with shame and courtesy, My honour would not let ingratitude So much besmear it.

Pardon me, good lady, For, by these blessed candles of the night, Had you been there, I think you would have begg'd The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.

And I his clerk, therefore be well advised How you do leave me to mine own protection.

Well, do you so, let not me take him, then, For if I do, I'll mar the young clerk's pen.

Sir, grieve not you, you are welcome notwithstanding.

Nay, but hear me: Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear I never more will break an oath with thee.

Give him this And bid him keep it better than the other.

By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor! I had it of him: pardon me, Bassanio, For, by this ring, the doctor lay with me.

And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano, For that same scrubbed boy, the doctor's clerk, In lieu of this last night did lie with me.

Why, this is like the mending of highways In summer, where the ways are fair enough: What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it? Speak not so grossly.

Were you the doctor and I knew you not? Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold? Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it, Unless he live until he be a man.

Sweet doctor, you shall be my bed-fellow: When I am absent, then lie with my wife.

Sweet lady, you have given me life and living, For here I read for certain that my ships Are safely come to road.

How now, Lorenzo! My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.

There do I give to you and Jessica, From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift, After his death, of all he dies possess'd of.

Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way Of starved people.

It is almost morning, And yet I am sure you are not satisfied Of these events at full.

Let us go in, And charge us there upon inter'gatories, And we will answer all things faithfully.

Well, while I live I'll fear no other thing So sore as keeping safe Nerissa's ring.

Sir Hugh, persuade me not, I will make a Star- chamber matter of it: if he were twenty Sir John Falstaffs, he shall not abuse Robert Shallow, esquire.

In the county of Gloucester, justice of peace and Ay, cousin Slender, and 'Custalourum.

Ay, and 'Rato-lorum' too, and a gentleman born, master parson, who writes himself 'Armigero,' in any bill, warrant, quittance, or obligation, 'Armigero.

Ay, that I do, and have done any time these three hundred years.

All his successors gone before him hath done't, and all his ancestors that come after him may: they may give the dozen white luces in their coat.

The dozen white louses do become an old coat well, it agrees well, passant, it is a familiar beast to man, and signifies love.

The luce is the fresh fish, the salt fish is an old coat.

Yes, py'r lady, if he has a quarter of your coat, there is but three skirts for yourself, in my simple conjectures: but that is all one.

If Sir John Falstaff have committed disparagements unto you, I am of the church, and will be glad to do my benevolence to make atonements and compremises between you.

It is not meet the council hear a riot, there is no fear of Got in a riot: the council, look you, shall desire to hear the fear of Got, and not to hear a riot, take your vizaments in that.

Ha! o' my life, if I were young again, the sword should end it.

Mistress Anne Page? She has brown hair, and speaks small like a woman.

Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound? Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.

Seven hundred pounds and possibilities is goot gifts.

Is Falstaff there? Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar as I do despise one that is false, or as I despise one that is not true.

The knight, Sir John, is there, and, I beseech you, be ruled by your well-willers.

Master Page, I am glad to see you: much good do it your good heart! I wished your venison better, it was ill killed.

How doth good Mistress Page?--and I thank you always with my heart, la! with my heart.

How does your fallow greyhound, sir? I heard say he was outrun on Cotsall.

'Tis your fault, 'tis your fault, 'tis a good dog.

Sir, he's a good dog, and a fair dog: can there be more said? he is good and fair.

Is Sir John Falstaff here? Sir, he is within, and I would I could do a good office between you.

If it be confessed, it is not redress'd: is not that so, Master Page? He hath wronged me, indeed he hath, at a word, he hath, believe me: Robert Shallow, esquire, saith, he is wronged.

Now, Master Shallow, you'll complain of me to the king? Knight, you have beaten my men, killed my deer, and broke open my lodge.

But not kissed your keeper's daughter? Tut, a pin! this shall be answered.

'Twere better for you if it were known in counsel: you'll be laughed at.

Slender, I broke your head: what matter have you against me? Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against you, and against your cony-catching rascals, Bardolph, Nym, and Pistol.

Slice, I say! pauca, pauca: slice! that's my humour.

Where's Simple, my man? Can you tell, cousin? Peace, I pray you.

Fery goot: I will make a prief of it in my note- book, and we will afterwards ork upon the cause with as great discreetly as we can.

The tevil and his tam! what phrase is this, 'He hears with ear'? why, it is affectations.

Is this true, Pistol? No, it is false, if it is a pick-purse.

Ha, thou mountain-foreigner! Sir John and Master mine, I combat challenge of this latten bilbo.

Word of denial in thy labras here! Word of denial: froth and scum, thou liest! By these gloves, then, 'twas he.

Be avised, sir, and pass good humours: I will say 'marry trap' with you, if you run the nuthook's humour on me, that is the very note of it.

By this hat, then, he in the red face had it, for though I cannot remember what I did when you made me drunk, yet I am not altogether an ass.

What say you, Scarlet and John? Why, sir, for my part I say the gentleman had drunk himself out of his five sentences.

It is his five senses: fie, what the ignorance is! And being fap, sir, was, as they say, cashiered, and so conclusions passed the careires.

You hear all these matters denied, gentlemen, you hear it.

Nay, daughter, carry the wine in, we'll drink within.

How now, Mistress Ford! Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well met: by your leave, good mistress.

Come, we have a hot venison pasty to dinner: come, gentlemen, I hope we shall drink down all unkindness.

I had rather than forty shillings I had my Book of Songs and Sonnets here.

A word with you, coz, marry, this, coz: there is, as 'twere, a tender, a kind of tender, made afar off by Sir Hugh here.

Do you understand me? Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable, if it be so, I shall do that that is reason.

Give ear to his motions, Master Slender: I will description the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.

Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says: I pray you, pardon me, he's a justice of peace in his country, simple though I stand here.

But that is not the question: the question is concerning your marriage.

Marry, is it, the very point of it, to Mistress Anne Page.

Why, if it be so, I will marry her upon any reasonable demands.

But can you affection the 'oman? Let us command to know that of your mouth or of your lips, for divers philosophers hold that the lips is parcel of the mouth.

Therefore, precisely, can you carry your good will to the maid? Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her? I hope, sir, I will do as it shall become one that would do reason.

Nay, Got's lords and his ladies! you must speak possitable, if you can carry her your desires towards her.

Will you, upon good dowry, marry her? I will do a greater thing than that, upon your request, cousin, in any reason.

Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz: what I do is to pleasure you, coz.

It is a fery discretion answer, save the fall is in the ort 'dissolutely:' the ort is, according to our meaning, 'resolutely:' his meaning is good.

Ay, or else I would I might be hanged, la! Here comes fair Mistress Anne.

Re-enter ANNE PAGE Would I were young for your sake, Mistress Anne! The dinner is on the table, my father desires your worships' company.

Od's plessed will! I will not be absence at the grace.

Will't please your worship to come in, sir? No, I thank you, forsooth, heartily, I am very well.

Go, sirrah, for all you are my man, go wait upon my cousin Shallow.

A justice of peace sometimes may be beholding to his friend for a man.

I keep but three men and a boy yet, till my mother be dead: but what though? Yet I live like a poor gentleman born.

I may not go in without your worship: they will not sit till you come.

I' faith, I'll eat nothing, I thank you as much as though I did.

I bruised my shin th' other day with playing at sword and dagger with a master of fence, three veneys for a dish of stewed prunes, and, by my troth, I cannot abide the smell of hot meat since.

Why do your dogs bark so? be there bears i' the town? I think there are, sir, I heard them talked of.

I love the sport well but I shall as soon quarrel at it as any man in England.

You are afraid, if you see the bear loose, are you not? Ay, indeed, sir.

Re-enter PAGE Come, gentle Master Slender, come, we stay for you.

By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir! come, come.

Give her this letter, for it is a 'oman that altogether's acquaintance with Mistress Anne Page: and the letter is, to desire and require her to solicit your master's desires to Mistress Anne Page.

I pray you, be gone: I will make an end of my dinner, there's pippins and cheese to come.

Mine host of the Garter! What says my bully-rook? speak scholarly and wisely.

Truly, mine host, I must turn away some of my Discard, bully Hercules, cashier: let them wag, trot, trot.

I will entertain Bardolph, he shall draw, he shall tap: said I well, bully Hector? Do so, good mine host.

To BARDOLPH Let me see thee froth and lime: I am at a word, follow.

A tapster is a good trade: an old cloak makes a new jerkin, a withered serving-man a fresh tapster.

Go, adieu. It is a life that I have desired: I will thrive.

'Steal!' foh! a fico for the phrase! Well, sirs, I am almost out at heels.

There is no remedy, I must cony-catch, I must shift.

Which of you know Ford of this town? I ken the wight: he is of substance good.

No quips now, Pistol! Indeed, I am in the waist two yards about, but I am now about no waste, I am about thrift.

He hath studied her will, and translated her will, out of honesty into English.

The anchor is deep: will that humour pass? Now, the report goes she has all the rule of her husband's purse: he hath a legion of angels.

As many devils entertain, and 'To her, boy,' say I.

The humour rises, it is good: humour me the angels.

I will be cheater to them both, and they shall be exchequers to me, they shall be my East and West Indies, and I will trade to them both.

Go bear thou this letter to Mistress Page, and thou this to Mistress Ford: we will thrive, lads, we will thrive.

Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become, And by my side wear steel? then, Lucifer take all! I will run no base humour: here, take the humour-letter: I will keep the havior of reputation.

Rogues, hence, avaunt! vanish like hailstones, go, Trudge, plod away o' the hoof, seek shelter, pack! Falstaff will learn the humour of the age, French thrift, you rogues, myself and skirted page.

Wilt thou revenge? By welkin and her star! With wit or steel? With both the humours, I: I will discuss the humour of this love to Page.

And I to Ford shall eke unfold How Falstaff, varlet vile, His dove will prove, his gold will hold, And his soft couch defile.

My humour shall not cool: I will incense Page to deal with poison, I will possess him with yellowness, for the revolt of mine is dangerous: that is my true humour.

Thou art the Mars of malecontents: I second thee, troop on.

What, John Rugby! I pray thee, go to the casement, and see if you can see my master, Master Doctor Caius, coming.

If he do, i' faith, and find any body in the house, here will be an old abusing of God's patience and the king's English.

Go, and we'll have a posset for't soon at night, in faith, at the latter end of a sea-coal fire.

Peter Simple, you say your name is? Ay, for fault of a better.

Does he not wear a great round beard, like a glover's paring-knife? No, forsooth: he hath but a little wee face, with a little yellow beard, a Cain-coloured beard.

A softly-sprighted man, is he not? Ay, forsooth: but he is as tall a man of his hands as any is between this and his head, he hath fought with a warrener.

How say you? O, I should remember him: does he not hold up his head, as it were, and strut in his gait? Yes, indeed, does he.

Well, heaven send Anne Page no worse fortune! Tell Master Parson Evans I will do what I can for your master: Anne is a good girl, and I wish-- Re-enter RUGBY Out, alas! here comes my master.

Run in here, good young man, go into this closet: he will not stay long.

Shuts SIMPLE in the closet What, John Rugby! John! what, John, I say! Go, John, go inquire for my master, I doubt he be not well, that he comes not home.

Pray you, go and vetch me in my closet un boitier vert, a box, a green-a box: do intend vat I speak? a green-a box.

I am glad he went not in himself: if he had found the young man, he would have been horn-mad.

Is it this, sir? Oui, mette le au mon pocket: depeche, quickly.

Vere is dat knave Rugby? What, John Rugby! John! Here, sir! You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby.

Come, take-a your rapier, and come after my heel to the court.

Od's me! Qu'ai-j'oublie! dere is some simples in my closet, dat I vill not for the varld I shall leave behind.

Ay me, he'll find the young man here, and be mad! O diable, diable! vat is in my closet? Villain! larron! Pulling SIMPLE out Rugby, my rapier! Good master, be content.

Wherefore shall I be content-a? The young man is an honest man.

What shall de honest man do in my closet? dere is no honest man dat shall come in my closet.

Hear the truth of it: he came of an errand to me from Parson Hugh.

Ay, forsooth, to desire her to-- Peace, I pray you.

Speak-a your tale. To desire this honest gentlewoman, your maid, to speak a good word to Mistress Anne Page for my master in the way of marriage.

This is all, indeed, la! but I'll ne'er put my finger in the fire, and need not.

had been thoroughly moved, you should have heard him so loud and so melancholy.

You jack'nape, give-a this letter to Sir Hugh, by gar, it is a shallenge: I will cut his troat in dee park, and I will teach a scurvy jack-a-nape priest to meddle or make.

By gar, I will cut all his two stones, by gar, he shall not have a stone to throw at his dog: Alas, he speaks but for his friend.

It is no matter-a ver dat: do not you tell-a me dat I shall have Anne Page for myself? By gar, I vill kill de Jack priest, and I have appointed mine host of de Jarteer to measure our weapon.

We must give folks leave to prate: what, the good-jer! Rugby, come to the court with me.

By gar, if I have not Anne Page, I shall turn your head out of my door.

Follow my heels, Rugby. You shall have An fool's-head of your own.

No, I know Anne's mind for that: never a woman in Windsor knows more of Anne's mind than I do, nor can do more than I do with her, I thank heaven.

Who's there, I trow! Come near the house, I pray you.

How now, good woman? how dost thou? The better that it pleases your good worship to ask.

What news? how does pretty Mistress Anne? In truth, sir, and she is pretty, and honest, and gentle, and one that is your friend, I can tell you that by the way, I praise heaven for it.

Shall I do any good, thinkest thou? shall I not lose my suit? Troth, sir, all is in his hands above: but notwithstanding, Master Fenton, I'll be sworn on a book, she loves you.

I shall never laugh but in that maid's company! But indeed she is given too much to allicholy and musing: but for you--well, go to.

Hold, there's money for thee, let me have thy voice in my behalf: if thou seest her before me, commend me.

Will I? i'faith, that we will, and I will tell your worship more of the wart the next time we have confidence, and of other wooers.

Truly, an honest gentleman: but Anne loves him not, for I know Anne's mind as well as another does.

Out upon't! what have I forgot? What, have I scaped love-letters in the holiday- time of my beauty, and am I now a subject for them? Let me see.

'Ask me no reason why I love you, for though Love use Reason for his physician, he admits him not for his counsellor.

I will not say, pity me, 'tis not a soldier-like phrase: but I say, love me.

How shall I be revenged on him? for revenged I will be, as sure as his guts are made of puddings.

Mistress Page! trust me, I was going to your house.

You look very Nay, I'll ne'er believe that, I have to show to the contrary.

Well, I do then, yet I say I could show you to the contrary.

O Mistress Page, give me some counsel! What's the matter, woman? O woman, if it were not for one trifling respect, I could come to such honour! Hang the trifle, woman! take the honour.

What is it? dispense with trifles, what is it? If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment or so, I could be knighted.

What? thou liest! Sir Alice Ford! These knights will hack, and so thou shouldst not alter the article of thy gentry.

We burn daylight: here, read, read, perceive how I might be knighted.

I had rather be a giantess, and lie under Mount Pelion.

Well, I will find you twenty lascivious turtles ere one chaste man.

Why, this is the very same, the very hand, the very words.

What doth he think of us? Nay, I know not: it makes me almost ready to wrangle with mine own honesty.

I'll entertain myself like one that I am not acquainted withal, for, sure, unless he know some strain in me, that I know not myself, he would never have boarded me in this fury.

'Boarding,' call you it? I'll be sure to keep him above deck.

So will I	if he come under my hatches, I'll never to sea again.

Let's be revenged on him: let's appoint him a meeting, give him a show of comfort in his suit and lead him on with a fine-baited delay, till he hath pawned his horses to mine host of the Garter.

Nay, I will consent to act any villany against him, that may not sully the chariness of our honesty.

O, that my husband saw this letter! it would give eternal food to his jealousy.

Why, look where he comes, and my good man too: he's as far from jealousy as I am from giving him cause, and that I hope is an unmeasurable distance.

Let's consult together against this greasy knight.

Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs: Sir John affects thy wife.

He wooes both high and low, both rich and poor, Both young and old, one with another, Ford, He loves the gallimaufry: Ford, perpend.

Prevent, or go thou, Like Sir Actaeon he, with Ringwood at thy heels: O, odious is the name! What name, sir? The horn, I say.

Farewell. Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night: Take heed, ere summer comes or cuckoo-birds do sing.

Away, Sir Corporal Nym! Believe it, Page, he speaks sense.

He hath wronged me in some humours: I should have borne the humoured letter to her, but I have a sword and it shall bite upon my necessity.

He loves your wife, there's the short and the long.

My name is Corporal Nym, I speak and I avouch, 'tis true: my name is Nym and Falstaff loves your wife.

I love not the humour of bread and cheese, and there's the humour of it.

Adieu. 'The humour of it,' quoth a'! here's a fellow frights English out of his wits.

I will not believe such a Cataian, though the priest o' the town commended him for a true man.

How now, Meg! MISTRESS PAGE and MISTRESS FORD come forward Whither go you, George? Hark you.

How now, sweet Frank! why art thou melancholy? I melancholy! I am not melancholy.

Get you home, go. Faith, thou hast some crotchets in thy head.

You'll come to dinner, George. Aside to MISTRESS FORD Look who comes yonder: she shall be our messenger to this paltry knight.

If he should intend this voyage towards my wife, I would turn her loose to him, and what he gets more of her than sharp words, let it lie on my head.

I do not misdoubt my wife, but I would be loath to turn them together.

A man may be too confident: I would have nothing lie on my head: I cannot be thus satisfied.

Look where my ranting host of the Garter comes: there is either liquor in his pate or money in his purse when he looks so merrily.

How now, mine host! How now, bully-rook! thou'rt a gentleman.

Cavaleiro-justice, I say! I follow, mine host, I follow.

Good even and twenty, good Master Page! Master Page, will you go with us? we have sport in hand.

Tell him, cavaleiro-justice, tell him, bully-rook.

Sir, there is a fray to be fought between Sir Hugh the Welsh priest and Caius the French doctor.

They converse apart Hast thou no suit against my knight, my None, I protest: but I'll give you a pottle of burnt sack to give me recourse to him and tell him my name is Brook, only for a jest.

My hand, bully, thou shalt have egress and regress, --said I well?--and thy name shall be Brook.

I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill in his rapier.

In these times you stand on distance, your passes, stoccadoes, and I know not what: 'tis the heart, Master Page, 'tis here, 'tis here.

I have seen the time, with my long sword I would have made you four tall fellows skip like rats.

Here, boys, here, here! shall we wag? Have with you.

Well, I will look further into't: and I have a disguise to sound Falstaff.

If I find her honest, I lose not my labour, if she be otherwise, 'tis labour well bestowed.

I am damned in hell for swearing to gentlemen my friends, you were good soldiers and tall fellows, and when Mistress Bridget lost the handle of her fan, I took't upon mine honour thou hadst it not.

Didst not thou share? hadst thou not fifteen pence? Reason, you rogue, reason: thinkest thou I'll endanger my soul gratis? At a word, hang no more about me, I am no gibbet for you.

Go. A short knife and a throng! To your manor of Pickt-hatch! Go.

I'll be sworn, As my mother was, the first hour I was born.

What with me? Shall I vouchsafe your worship a word or two? Two thousand, fair woman: and I'll vouchsafe thee the hearing.

I warrant thee, nobody hears, mine own people, mine own people.

Are they so? God bless them and make them his servants! Well, Mistress Ford, what of her? Why, sir, she's a good creature.

The best courtier of them all, when the court lay at Windsor, could never have brought her to such a canary.

Ten and eleven? Ay, forsooth, and then you may come and see the picture, she says, that you wot of: Master Ford, her husband, will be from home.

Alas! the sweet woman leads an ill life with him: he's a very jealousy man: she leads a very frampold life with him, good heart.

I never knew a woman so dote upon a man: surely I think you have charms, la, yes, in truth.

Not I, I assure thee: setting the attractions of my good parts aside I have no other charms.

Fare thee well: commend me to them both: there's my purse, I am yet thy debtor.

Will they yet look after thee? Wilt thou, after the expense of so much money, be now a gainer? Good body, I thank thee.

Let them say 'tis grossly done, so it be fairly done, no matter.

Sir John, there's one Master Brook below would fain speak with you, and be acquainted with you, and hath sent your worship a morning's draught of sack.

Such Brooks are welcome to me, that o'erflow such liquor.

What's your will? Give us leave, drawer. Sir, I am a gentleman that have spent much, my name is Brook.

Good Master Brook, I desire more acquaintance of you.

Troth, and I have a bag of money here troubles me: if you will help to bear it, Sir John, take all, or half, for easing me of the carriage.

Sir, I know not how I may deserve to be your porter.

I will tell you, sir, if you will give me the hearing.

Speak, good Master Brook: I shall be glad to be your servant.

Sir, I hear you are a scholar,--I will be brief with you,--and you have been a man long known to me, though I had never so good means, as desire, to make myself acquainted with you.

There is a gentlewoman in this town, her husband's name is Ford.

To what purpose have you unfolded this to me? When I have told you that, I have told you all.

Some say, that though she appear honest to me, yet in other places she enlargeth her mirth so far that there is shrewd construction made of her.

She dwells so securely on the excellency of her honour, that the folly of my soul dares not present itself: she is too bright to be looked against.

What say you to't, Sir John? Master Brook, I will first make bold with your money, next, give me your hand, and last, as I am a gentleman, you shall, if you will, enjoy Ford's wife.

Want no Mistress Ford, Master Brook, you shall want none.

Come you to me at night, you shall know how I speed.

I will use her as the key of the cuckoldly rogue's coffer, and there's my harvest-home.

I would you knew Ford, sir, that you might avoid him if you saw him.

Hang him, mechanical salt-butter rogue! I will stare him out of his wits, I will awe him with my cudgel: it shall hang like a meteor o'er the cuckold's horns.

Master Brook, thou shalt know I will predominate over the peasant, and thou shalt lie with his wife.

Come to me soon at night. Ford's a knave, and I will aggravate his style, thou, Master Brook, shalt know him for knave and cuckold.

Come to me soon at night. What a damned Epicurean rascal is this! My heart is ready to crack with impatience.

Who says this is improvident jealousy? my wife hath sent to him, the hour is fixed, the match is made.

Terms! names! Amaimon sounds well, Lucifer, well, Barbason, well, yet they are devils' additions, the names of fiends: but Cuckold! Wittol!--Cuckold! the devil himself hath not such a name.

Page is an ass, a secure ass: he will trust his wife, he will not be jealous.

God be praised for my jealousy! Eleven o'clock the hour.

I will prevent this, detect my wife, be revenged on Falstaff, and laugh at Page.

I will about it, better three hours too soon than a minute too late.

Fie, fie, fie! cuckold! cuckold! cuckold! Jack Rugby! Vat is de clock, Jack? 'Tis past the hour, sir, that Sir Hugh promised to meet.

By gar, he has save his soul, dat he is no come, he has pray his Pible well, dat he is no come: by gar, Jack Rugby, he is dead already, if he be come.

He is wise, sir, he knew your worship would kill him, if he came.

By gar, de herring is no dead so as I vill kill him.

Take your rapier, Jack, I vill tell you how I vill kill him.

Bless thee, bully doctor! Save you, Master Doctor Caius! Now, good master doctor! Give you good morrow, sir.

Hector of Greece, my boy! I pray you, bear vitness that me have stay six or seven, two, tree hours for him, and he is no come.

He is the wiser man, master doctor: he is a curer of souls, and you a curer of bodies, if you should fight, you go against the hair of your professions.

Is it not true, Master Page? Master Shallow, you have yourself been a great fighter, though now a man of peace.

Bodykins, Master Page, though I now be old and of the peace, if I see a sword out, my finger itches to make one.

Though we are justices and doctors and churchmen, Master Page, we have some salt of our youth in us, we are the sons of women, Master Page.

I am sworn of the peace: you have showed yourself a wise physician, and Sir Hugh hath shown himself a wise and patient churchman.

You must go with me, master doctor. Pardon, guest-justice.

A word, Mounseur Mockwater. Mock-vater! vat is dat? Mock-water, in our English tongue, is valour, bully.

By gar, den, I have as mush mock-vater as de Englishman.

Scurvy jack-dog priest! by gar, me vill cut his ears.

Clapper-de-claw! vat is dat? That is, he will make thee amends.

By gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw me, for, by gar, me vill have it.

And, moreover, bully,--but first, master guest, and Master Page, and eke Cavaleiro Slender, go you through the town to Frogmore.

Aside to them Sir Hugh is there, is he? He is there: see what humour he is in, and I will bring the doctor about by the fields.

By gar, me vill kill de priest, for he speak for a jack-an-ape to Anne Page.

Cried I aim? said I well? By gar, me dank you for dat: by gar, I love you, and I shall procure-a you de good guest, de earl, de knight, de lords, de gentlemen, my patients.

For the which I will be thy adversary toward Anne Page.

'Pless my soul, how full of chollors I am, and trempling of mind! I shall be glad if he have deceived me.

How melancholies I am! I will knog his urinals about his knave's costard when I have good opportunities for the ork.

'Pless my soul! To shallow rivers, to whose falls Melodious birds sings madrigals, There will we make our peds of roses, And a thousand fragrant posies.

To shallow-- Mercy on me! I have a great dispositions to cry.

Melodious birds sing madrigals-- When as I sat in Pabylon-- And a thousand vagram posies.

Re-enter SIMPLE Yonder he is coming, this way, Sir Hugh.

To shallow rivers, to whose falls- Heaven prosper the right! What weapons is he? No weapons, sir.

There comes my master, Master Shallow, and another gentleman, from Frogmore, over the stile, this way.

Pray you, give me my gown, or else keep it in your arms.

How now, master Parson! Good morrow, good Sir Hugh.

Keep a gamester from the dice, and a good student from his book, and it is wonderful.

We are come to you to do a good office, master parson.

What is he? I think you know him, Master Doctor Caius, the renowned French physician.

Got's will, and his passion of my heart! I had as lief you would tell me of a mess of porridge.

He has no more knowledge in Hibocrates and Galen, --and he is a knave besides, a cowardly knave as you would desires to be acquainted withal.

I warrant you, he's the man should fight with him.

Disarm them, and let them question: let them keep their limbs whole and hack our English.

laughing-stocks to other men's humours, I desire you in friendship, and I will one way or other make you amends.

I will knog your urinals about your knave's cockscomb for missing your meetings and appointments.

Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and Welsh, soul-curer and body-curer! Ay, dat is very good, excellent.

Am I politic? am I subtle? am I a Machiavel? Shall I lose my doctor? no, he gives me the potions and the motions.

Shall I lose my parson, my priest, my Sir Hugh? no, he gives me the proverbs and the no-verbs.

Give me thy hand, terrestrial, so. Give me thy hand, celestial, so.

Boys of art, I have deceived you both, I have directed you to wrong places: your hearts are mighty, your skins are whole, and let burnt sack be the issue.

Follow, gentlemen, follow. Ha, do I perceive dat? have you make-a de sot of us, ha, ha? This is well, he has made us his vlouting-stog.

I desire you that we may be friends, and let us knog our prains together to be revenge on this same scall, scurvy cogging companion, the host of the Garter.

He promise to bring me where is Anne Page, by gar, he deceive me too.

Pray you, follow. Nay, keep your way, little gallant, you were wont to be a follower, but now you are a leader.

Whether had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye your master's heels? I had rather, forsooth, go before you like a man than follow him like a dwarf.

O, you are a flattering boy: now I see you'll be a courtier.

Is she at home? Ay, and as idle as she may hang together, for want of company.

I think, if your husbands were dead, you two would marry.

Where had you this pretty weather-cock? I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my husband had him of.

What do you call your knight's name, sirrah? Sir John Falstaff.

Sir John Falstaff! He, he, I can never hit on's name.

There is such a league between my good man and he! Is your wife at home indeed? Indeed she is.

Has Page any brains? hath he any eyes? hath he any thinking? Sure, they sleep, he hath no use of them.

Why, this boy will carry a letter twenty mile, as easy as a cannon will shoot point-blank twelve score.

He pieces out his wife's inclination, he gives her folly motion and advantage: and now she's going to my wife, and Falstaff's boy with her.

And Falstaff's boy with her! Good plots, they are laid, and our revolted wives share damnation together.

Trust me, a good knot: I have good cheer at home, and I pray you all go with me.

And so must I, sir: we have appointed to dine with Mistress Anne, and I would not break with her for more money than I'll speak of.

We have lingered about a match between Anne Page and my cousin Slender, and this day we shall have our answer.

You have, Master Slender, I stand wholly for you: but my wife, master doctor, is for you altogether.

Ay, be-gar, and de maid is love-a me: my nursh-a Quickly tell me so mush.

The gentleman is of no having: he kept company with the wild prince and Poins, he is of too high a region, he knows too much.

No, he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes with the finger of my substance: if he take her, let him take her simply, the wealth I have waits on my consent, and my consent goes not that way.

I beseech you heartily, some of you go home with me to dinner: besides your cheer, you shall have sport, I will show you a monster.

Master doctor, you shall go, so shall you, Master Page, and you, Sir Hugh.

Well, fare you well: we shall have the freer wooing at Master Page's.

Farewell, my hearts: I will to my honest knight Falstaff, and drink canary with him.

Will you go, gentles? Have with you to see this monster.

What, John! What, Robert! Quickly, quickly! is the buck-basket-- I warrant.

You will do it? I ha' told them over and over, they lack no direction.

Be gone, and come when you are called. Here comes little Robin.

How now, my eyas-musket! what news with you? My master, Sir John, is come in at your back-door, Mistress Ford, and requests your company.

You little Jack-a-Lent, have you been true to us? Ay, I'll be sworn.

My master knows not of your being here and hath threatened to put me into everlasting liberty if I tell you of it, for he swears he'll turn me away.

Thou'rt a good boy: this secrecy of thine shall be a tailor to thee and shall make thee a new doublet and hose.

Go tell thy master I am alone. Mistress Page, remember you your cue.

Go to, then: we'll use this unwholesome humidity, this gross watery pumpion, we'll teach him to know turtles from jays.

Now shall I sin in my wish: I would thy husband were dead: I'll speak it before the best lord, I would make thee my lady.

I your lady, Sir John! alas, I should be a pitiful lady! Let the court of France show me such another.

I see how thine eye would emulate the diamond: thou hast the right arched beauty of the brow that becomes the ship-tire, the tire-valiant, or any tire of Venetian admittance.

A plain kerchief, Sir John: my brows become nothing else, nor that well neither.

By the Lord, thou art a traitor to say so: thou wouldst make an absolute courtier, and the firm fixture of thy foot would give an excellent motion to thy gait in a semi-circled farthingale.

I see what thou wert, if Fortune thy foe were not, Nature thy friend.

Come, thou canst not hide it. Believe me, there is no such thing in me.

What made me love thee? let that persuade thee there's something extraordinary in thee.

I fear you love Mistress Page. Thou mightst as well say I love to walk by the Counter-gate, which is as hateful to me as the reek of a lime-kiln.

Well, heaven knows how I love you, and you shall one day find it.

Nay, I must tell you, so you do, or else I could not be in that mind.

Mistress Page at the door, sweating and blowing and looking wildly, and would needs speak with you presently.

She shall not see me: I will ensconce me behind the arras.

Pray heaven it be not so, that you have such a man here! but 'tis most certain your husband's coming, with half Windsor at his heels, to search for such a one.

I come before to tell you. If you know yourself clear, why, I am glad of it, but if you have a friend here convey, convey him out.

Be not amazed, call all your senses to you, defend your reputation, or bid farewell to your good life for ever.

What shall I do? There is a gentleman my dear friend, and I fear not mine own shame so much as his peril: I had rather than a thousand pound he were out of the house.

For shame! never stand 'you had rather' and 'you had rather:' your husband's here at hand, bethink you of some conveyance: in the house you cannot hide him.

I'll in. What, Sir John Falstaff! Are these your letters, knight? I love thee.

Help me away. Let me creep in here. I'll never-- Gets into the basket, they cover him with foul linen Help to cover your master, boy.

You dissembling knight! What, John! Robert! John! Re-enter Servants Go take up these clothes here quickly.

Where's the cowl-staff? look, how you drumble! Carry them to the laundress in Datchet-meat, quickly, come.

Pray you, come near: if I suspect without cause, why then make sport at me, then let me be your jest, I deserve it.

How now! whither bear you this? To the laundress, forsooth.

Why, what have you to do whither they bear it? You were best meddle with buck-washing.

Buck! I would I could wash myself of the buck! Buck, buck, buck! Ay, buck, I warrant you, buck, and of the season too, it shall appear.

Gentlemen, I have dreamed to-night, I'll tell you my dream.

Here, here, here be my keys: ascend my chambers, search, seek, find out: I'll warrant we'll unkennel the fox.

Let me stop this way first. Locking the door So, now uncape.

Good Master Ford, be contented: you wrong yourself too much.

Up, gentlemen: you shall see sport anon: follow me, gentlemen.

By gar, 'tis no the fashion of France, it is not jealous in France.

Nay, follow him, gentlemen, see the issue of his search.

Is there not a double excellency in this? I know not which pleases me better, that my husband is deceived, or Sir John.

What a taking was he in when your husband asked who was in the basket! I am half afraid he will have need of washing, so throwing him into the water will do him a benefit.

Hang him, dishonest rascal! I would all of the same strain were in the same distress.

I think my husband hath some special suspicion of Falstaff's being here, for I never saw him so gross in his jealousy till now.

I will lay a plot to try that, and we will yet have more tricks with Falstaff: his dissolute disease will scarce obey this medicine.

Re-enter FORD, PAGE, DOCTOR CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS I cannot find him: may be the knave bragged of that he could not compass.

You use me well, Master Ford, do you? Ay, I do so.

Heaven make you better than your thoughts! You do yourself mighty wrong, Master Ford.

If there be any pody in the house, and in the chambers, and in the coffers, and in the presses, heaven forgive my sins at the day of judgment! By gar, nor I too: there is no bodies.

Fie, fie, Master Ford! are you not ashamed? What spirit, what devil suggests this imagination? I would not ha' your distemper in this kind for the wealth of Windsor Castle.

You suffer for a pad conscience: your wife is as honest a 'omans as I will desires among five thousand, and five hundred too.

Come, come, walk in the Park: I pray you, pardon me, I will hereafter make known to you why I have done this.

Let's go in, gentlemen, but, trust me, we'll mock him.

I do invite you to-morrow morning to my house to breakfast: after, we'll a-birding together, I have a fine hawk for the bush.

I pray you now, remembrance tomorrow on the lousy knave, mine host.

Dat is good, by gar, with all my heart! A lousy knave, to have his gibes and his mockeries! I see I cannot get thy father's love, Therefore no more turn me to him, sweet Nan.

I'll make a shaft or a bolt on't: 'slid, 'tis but Be not dismayed.

No, she shall not dismay me: I care not for that, but that I am afeard.

Hark ye, Master Slender would speak a word with you.

O, what a world of vile ill-favor'd faults Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a-year! And how does good Master Fenton? Pray you, a word with you.

O boy, thou hadst a father! I had a father, Mistress Anne, my uncle can tell you good jests of him.

Pray you, uncle, tell Mistress Anne the jest, how my father stole two geese out of a pen, good uncle.

Ay, that I do, as well as I love any woman in He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.

Ay, that I will, come cut and long-tail, under the degree of a squire.

He will make you a hundred and fifty pounds jointure.

Marry, I thank you for it, I thank you for that good comfort.

I mean, Master Slender, what would you with me? Truly, for mine own part, I would little or nothing with you.

Your father and my uncle hath made motions: if it be my luck, so, if not, happy man be his dole! They can tell you how things go better than I can: you may ask your father, here he comes.

Why, how now! what does Master Fenton here? You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house: I told you, sir, my daughter is disposed of.

Alas, I had rather be set quick i' the earth And bowl'd to death with turnips! Come, trouble not yourself.

Good Master Fenton, I will not be your friend nor enemy: My daughter will I question how she loves you, And as I find her, so am I affected.

Till then farewell, sir: she must needs go in, Her father will be angry.

This is my doing, now: 'Nay,' said I, 'will you cast away your child on a fool, and a physician? Look on Master Fenton:' this is my doing.

I thank thee, and I pray thee, once to-night Give my sweet Nan this ring: there's for thy pains.

Now heaven send thee good fortune! A kind heart he hath: a woman would run through fire and water for such a kind heart.

Well, I must of another errand to Sir John Falstaff from my two mistresses: what a beast am I to slack it! Bardolph, I say,-- Here, sir.

Re-enter BARDOLPH with sack Here's Mistress Quickly, sir, to speak with you.

Let me pour in some sack to the Thames water, for my belly's as cold as if I had swallowed snowballs for pills to cool the reins.

Call her in. Come in, woman! By your leave, I cry you mercy: give your worship good morrow.

With eggs, sir? Simple of itself, I'll no pullet-sperm in my brewage.

How now! Marry, sir, I come to your worship from Mistress Ford.

Mistress Ford! I have had ford enough, I was thrown into the ford, I have my belly full of ford.

Alas the day! good heart, that was not her fault: she does so take on with her men, they mistook their erection.

So did I mine, to build upon a foolish woman's promise.

Well, she laments, sir, for it, that it would yearn your heart to see it.

Her husband goes this morning a-birding, she desires you once more to come to her between eight and nine: I must carry her word quickly: she'll make you amends, I warrant you.

Well, I will visit her: tell her so, and bid her think what a man is: let her consider his frailty, and then judge of my merit.

Between nine and ten, sayest thou? Eight and nine, sir.

I marvel I hear not of Master Brook, he sent me word to stay within: I like his money well.

O, here he comes. Bless you, sir! Now, master Brook, you come to know what hath passed between me and Ford's wife? That, indeed, Sir John, is my business.

Master Brook, I will not lie to you: I was at her house the hour she appointed me.

And sped you, sir? Very ill-favoredly, Master Brook.

And did he search for you, and could not find you? You shall hear.

As good luck would have it, comes in one Mistress Page, gives intelligence of Ford's approach, and, in her invention and Ford's wife's distraction, they conveyed me into a buck-basket.

And how long lay you there? Nay, you shall hear, Master Brook, what I have suffered to bring this woman to evil for your good.

Well: on went he for a search, and away went I for foul clothes.

In good sadness, I am sorry that for my sake you have sufferd all this.

My suit then is desperate, you'll undertake her no more? Master Brook, I will be thrown into Etna, as I have been into Thames, ere I will leave her thus.

Her husband is this morning gone a-birding: I have received from her another embassy of meeting, 'twixt eight and nine is the hour, Master Brook.

Come to me at your convenient leisure, and you shall know how I speed, and the conclusion shall be crowned with your enjoying her.

Adieu. You shall have her, Master Brook, Master Brook, you shall cuckold Ford.

Hum! ha! is this a vision? is this a dream? do I sleep? Master Ford awake! awake, Master Ford! there's a hole made in your best coat, Master Ford.

Though what I am I cannot avoid, yet to be what I would not shall not make me tame: if I have horns to make one mad, let the proverb go with me: I'll be horn-mad.

Is he at Master Ford's already, think'st thou? Sure he is by this, or will be presently: but, truly, he is very courageous mad about his throwing into the water.

Mistress Ford desires you to come suddenly. I'll be with her by and by, I'll but bring my young man here to school.

Look, where his master comes, 'tis a playing-day, I see.

How now, Sir Hugh! no school to-day? No, Master Slender is let the boys leave to play.

Blessing of his heart! Sir Hugh, my husband says my son profits nothing in the world at his book.

I pray you, ask him some questions in his accidence.

Come on, sirrah, hold up your head, answer your master, be not afraid.

William, how many numbers is in nouns? Truly, I thought there had been one number more, because they say, ''Od's nouns.

Peace your tattlings! What is 'fair,' William? Polecats! there are fairer things than polecats, sure.

You are a very simplicity 'oman: I pray you peace.

No, it is 'lapis:' I pray you, remember in your prain.

What is he, William, that does lend articles? Articles are borrowed of the pronoun, and be thus declined, Singulariter, nominativo, hic, haec, hoc.

Nominativo, hig, hag, hog, pray you, mark: genitivo, hujus.

Well, what is your accusative case? Accusativo, hinc.

I pray you, have your remembrance, child, accusative, hung, hang, hog.

What is the focative case, William? O,--vocativo, O.

What is your genitive case plural, William? Genitive case! Genitive,--horum, harum, horum.

Vengeance of Jenny's case! fie on her! never name her, child, if she be a whore.

Show me now, William, some declensions of your pronouns.

It is qui, quae, quod: if you forget your 'quies,' your 'quaes,' and your 'quods,' you must be preeches.

Go your ways, and play, go. He is a better scholar than I thought he was.

Come, we stay too long. Mistress Ford, your sorrow hath eaten up my sufferance.

I see you are obsequious in your love, and I profess requital to a hair's breadth, not only, Mistress Ford, in the simple office of love, but in all the accoutrement, complement and ceremony of it.

But are you sure of your husband now? He's a-birding, sweet Sir John.

How now, sweetheart! who's at home besides yourself? Why, none but mine own people.

How near is he, Mistress Page? Hard by, at street end, he will be here anon.

Why then you are utterly shamed, and he's but a dead man.

What a woman are you!--Away with him, away with him! better shame than murder.

Which way should be go? how should I bestow him? Shall I put him into the basket again? Re-enter FALSTAFF No, I'll come no more i' the basket.

May I not go out ere he come? Alas, three of Master Ford's brothers watch the door with pistols, that none shall issue out, otherwise you might slip away ere he came.

But what make you here? What shall I do? I'll creep up into the chimney.

There they always use to discharge their birding-pieces.

Creep into the kiln-hole. Where is it? He will seek there, on my word.

Neither press, coffer, chest, trunk, well, vault, but he hath an abstract for the remembrance of such places, and goes to them by his note: there is no hiding you in the house.

If you go out in your own semblance, you die, Sir John.

Unless you go out disguised-- How might we disguise him? Alas the day, I know not! There is no woman's gown big enough for him otherwise he might put on a hat, a muffler and a kerchief, and so escape.

Good hearts, devise something: any extremity rather than a mischief.

My maid's aunt, the fat woman of Brentford, has a gown above.

On my word, it will serve him, she's as big as he is: and there's her thrummed hat and her muffler too.

Run up, Sir John. Go, go, sweet Sir John: Mistress Page and I will look some linen for your head.

Quick, quick! we'll come dress you straight: put on the gown the while.

I would my husband would meet him in this shape: he cannot abide the old woman of Brentford, he swears she's a witch, forbade her my house and hath threatened to beat her.

We'll try that, for I'll appoint my men to carry the basket again, to meet him at the door with it, as they did last time.

Nay, but he'll be here presently: let's go dress him like the witch of Brentford.

I'll first direct my men what they shall do with the basket.

Go up, I'll bring linen for him straight. Hang him, dishonest varlet! we cannot misuse him enough.

We'll leave a proof, by that which we will do, Wives may be merry, and yet honest too: We do not act that often jest and laugh, 'Tis old, but true, Still swine eat all the draff.

Re-enter MISTRESS FORD with two Servants Go, sirs, take the basket again on your shoulders: your master is hard at door, if he bid you set it down, obey him: quickly, dispatch.

Ay, but if it prove true, Master Page, have you any way then to unfool me again? Set down the basket, villain! Somebody call my wife.

Youth in a basket! O you panderly rascals! there's a knot, a ging, a pack, a conspiracy against me: now shall the devil be shamed.

What, wife, I say! Come, come forth! Behold what honest clothes you send forth to bleaching! Why, this passes, Master Ford, you are not to go loose any longer, you must be pinioned.

Why, this is lunatics! this is mad as a mad dog! Indeed, Master Ford, this is not well, indeed.

Come forth, sirrah! Pulling clothes out of the basket This passes! Are you not ashamed? let the clothes alone.

'Tis unreasonable! Will you take up your wife's clothes? Come away.

If you find a man there, he shall die a flea's death.

By my fidelity, this is not well, Master Ford, this wrongs you.

Master Ford, you must pray, and not follow the imaginations of your own heart: this is jealousies.

If I find not what I seek, show no colour for my extremity, let me for ever be your table-sport, let them say of me, 'As jealous as Ford, Chat searched a hollow walnut for his wife's leman.

What, ho, Mistress Page! come you and the old woman down, my husband will come into the chamber.

Old woman! what old woman's that? Nay, it is my maid's aunt of Brentford.

She works by charms, by spells, by the figure, and such daubery as this is, beyond our element we know nothing.

Come down, you witch, you hag, you, come down, I say! Nay, good, sweet husband! Good gentlemen, let him not strike the old woman.

Re-enter FALSTAFF in woman's clothes, and MISTRESS PAGE Come, Mother Prat, come, give me your hand.

Beating him Out of my door, you witch, you hag, you baggage, you polecat, you runyon! out, out! I'll conjure you, I'll fortune-tell you.

Are you not ashamed? I think you have killed the poor woman.

'Tis a goodly credit for you. Hang her, witch! By the yea and no, I think the 'oman is a witch indeed: I like not when a 'oman has a great peard, I spy a great peard under his muffler.

Will you follow, gentlemen? I beseech you, follow, see but the issue of my jealousy: if I cry out thus upon no trail, never trust me when I open again.

Let's obey his humour a little further: come, Trust me, he beat him most pitifully.

Nay, by the mass, that he did not, he beat him most unpitifully, methought.

I'll have the cudgel hallowed and hung o'er the altar, it hath done meritorious service.

Shall we tell our husbands how we have served him? Yes, by all means, if it be but to scrape the figures out of your husband's brains.

If they can find in their hearts the poor unvirtuous fat knight shall be any further afflicted, we two will still be the ministers.

I'll warrant they'll have him publicly shamed: and methinks there would be no period to the jest, should he not be publicly shamed.

Come, to the forge with it then, shape it: I would not have things cool.

Sir, the Germans desire to have three of your horses: the duke himself will be to-morrow at court, and they are going to meet him.

What duke should that be comes so secretly? I hear not of him in the court.

Let me speak with the gentlemen: they speak English? Ay, sir, I'll call them to you.

They shall have my horses, but I'll make them pay, I'll sauce them: they have had my house a week at command, I have turned away my other guests: they must come off, I'll sauce them.

Come. 'Tis one of the best discretions of a 'oman as ever I did look upon.

And did he send you both these letters at an instant? Within a quarter of an hour.

Henceforth do what thou wilt, I rather will suspect the sun with cold Than thee with wantonness: now doth thy honour stand In him that was of late an heretic, As firm as faith.

'Tis well, 'tis well, no more: Be not as extreme in submission As in offence.

But let our plot go forward: let our wives Yet once again, to make us public sport, Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow, Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.

How? to send him word they'll meet him in the park at midnight? Fie, fie! he'll never come.

Devise but how you'll use him when he comes, And let us two devise to bring him thither.

Why, yet there want not many that do fear In deep of night to walk by this Herne's oak: But what of this? Marry, this is our device, That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us.

And till he tell the truth, Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound And burn him with their tapers.

The truth being known, We'll all present ourselves, dis-horn the spirit, And mock him home to Windsor.

The children must Be practised well to this, or they'll ne'er do't.

I will teach the children their behaviors, and I will be like a jack-an-apes also, to burn the knight with my taber.

I'll go and buy them vizards. My Nan shall be the queen of all the fairies, Finely attired in a robe of white.

And in that time Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away And marry her at Eton.

Go send to Falstaff straight. Nay I'll to him again in name of Brook He'll tell me all his purpose: sure, he'll come.

Go get us properties And tricking for our fairies.

Let us about it: it is admirable pleasures and fery honest knaveries.

Go, Mistress Ford, Send quickly to Sir John, to know his mind.

I'll to the doctor: he hath my good will, And none but he, to marry with Nan Page.

That Slender, though well landed, is an idiot, And he my husband best of all affects.

The doctor is well money'd, and his friends Potent at court: he, none but he, shall have her, Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.

What wouldst thou have, boor? what: thick-skin? speak, breathe, discuss, brief, short, quick, snap.

Marry, sir, I come to speak with Sir John Falstaff from Master Slender.

There's his chamber, his house, his castle, his standing-bed and truckle-bed, 'tis painted about with the story of the Prodigal, fresh and new.

Go knock and call, hell speak like an Anthropophaginian unto thee: knock, I say.

There's an old woman, a fat woman, gone up into his chamber: I'll be so bold as stay, sir, till she come down, I come to speak with her, indeed.

Ha! a fat woman! the knight may be robbed: I'll call.

Bully knight! bully Sir John! speak from thy lungs military: art thou there? it is thine host, thine Ephesian, calls.

Here's a Bohemian-Tartar tarries the coming down of thy fat woman.

Let her descend, bully, let her descend, my chambers are honourable: fie! privacy? There was, mine host, an old fat woman even now with me,  but she's gone.

Why, sir, they were nothing but about Mistress Anne Page, to know if it were my master's fortune to have her or no.

Go, say the woman told me so. May I be bold to say so, sir? Ay, sir, like who more bold.

I thank your worship: I shall make my master glad with these tidings.

Out, alas, sir! cozenage, mere cozenage! Where be my horses? speak well of them, varletto.

Run away with the cozeners, for so soon as I came beyond Eton, they threw me off from behind one of them, in a slough of mire, and set spurs and away, like three German devils, three Doctor Faustuses.

They are gone but to meet the duke, villain: do not say they be fled, Germans are honest men.

I tell you for good will, look you: you are wise and full of gibes and vlouting-stocks, and 'tis not convenient you should be cozened.

Fare you well. Vere is mine host de Jarteer? Here, master doctor, in perplexity and doubtful dilemma.

I cannot tell vat is dat: but it is tell-a me dat you make grand preparation for a duke de Jamany: by my trot, dere is no duke dat the court is know to come.

I tell you for good vill: adieu. Hue and cry, villain, go! Assist me, knight.

I am undone! Fly, run, hue and cry, villain! I am undone! I would all the world might be cozened, for I have been cozened and beaten too.

I never prospered since I forswore myself at primero.

Well, if my wind were but long enough to say my prayers, I would repent.

Now, whence come you? From the two parties, forsooth.

The devil take one party and his dam the other! and so they shall be both bestowed.

I have suffered more for their sakes, more than the villanous inconstancy of man's disposition is able to bear.

And have not they suffered? Yes, I warrant, speciously one of them, Mistress Ford, good heart, is beaten black and blue, that you cannot see a white spot about her.

Sir, let me speak with you in your chamber: you shall hear how things go, and, I warrant, to your content.

Here is a letter will say somewhat. Good hearts, what ado here is to bring you together! Sure, one of you does not serve heaven well, that you are so crossed.

Master Fenton, talk not to me, my mind is heavy: I will give over all.

Assist me in my purpose, And, as I am a gentleman, I'll give thee A hundred pound in gold more than your loss.

I will hear you, Master Fenton, and I will at the least keep your counsel.

Well, husband your device, I'll to the vicar: Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.

So shall I evermore be bound to thee, Besides, I'll make a present recompense.

I'll hold. This is the third time, I hope good luck lies in odd numbers.

Away I go. They say there is divinity in odd numbers, either in nativity, chance, or death.

Away! I'll provide you a chain, and I'll do what I can to get you a pair of horns.

Away, I say, time wears: hold up your head, and mince.

How now, Master Brook! Master Brook, the matter will be known to-night, or never.

Be you in the Park about midnight, at Herne's oak, and you shall see wonders.

Went you not to her yesterday, sir, as you told me you had appointed? I went to her, Master Brook, as you see, like a poor old man: but I came from her, Master Brook, like a poor old woman.

That same knave Ford, her husband, hath the finest mad devil of jealousy in him, Master Brook, that ever governed frenzy.

I will tell you: he beat me grievously, in the shape of a woman, for in the shape of man, Master Brook, I fear not Goliath with a weaver's beam, because I know also life is a shuttle.

I am in haste, go along with me: I'll tell you all, Master Brook.

Since I plucked geese, played truant and whipped top, I knew not what 'twas to be beaten till lately.

Follow me: I'll tell you strange things of this knave Ford, on whom to-night I will be revenged, and I will deliver his wife into your hand.

Follow. Strange things in hand, Master Brook! Follow.

Come, come, we'll couch i' the castle-ditch till we see the light of our fairies.

Ay, forsooth, I have spoke with her and we have a nay-word how to know one another: I come to her in white, and cry 'mum,' she cries 'budget,' and by that we know one another.

That's good too: but what needs either your 'mum' or her 'budget?' the white will decipher her well enough.

It hath struck ten o'clock. The night is dark, light and spirits will become it well.

Heaven prosper our sport! No man means evil but the devil, and we shall know him by his horns.

Master doctor, my daughter is in green: when you see your time, take her by the band, away with her to the deanery, and dispatch it quickly.

My husband will not rejoice so much at the abuse of Falstaff as he will chafe at the doctor's marrying my daughter: but 'tis no matter, better a little chiding than a great deal of heart-break.

If he be not amazed, he will be mocked, if he be amazed, he will every way be mocked.

Against such lewdsters and their lechery Those that betray them do no treachery.

To the oak, to the oak! Trib, trib, fairies, come, and remember your parts: be pold, I pray you, follow me into the pit, and when I give the watch-'ords, do as I pid you: come, come, trib, trib.

The Windsor bell hath struck twelve, the minute draws on.

Now, the hot-blooded gods assist me! Remember, Jove, thou wast a bull for thy Europa, love set on thy horns.

O powerful love! that, in some respects, makes a beast a man, in some other, a man a beast.

You were also, Jupiter, a swan for the love of Leda.

O omnipotent Love! how near the god drew to the complexion of a goose! A fault done first in the form of a beast.

Divide me like a bribe buck, each a haunch: I will keep my sides to myself, my shoulders for the fellow of this walk, and my horns I bequeath your husbands.

Am I a woodman, ha? Speak I like Herne the hunter? Why, now is Cupid a child of conscience, he makes restitution.

Fairies, black, grey, green, and white, You moonshine revellers and shades of night, You orphan heirs of fixed destiny, Attend your office and your quality.

Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap: Where fires thou find'st unraked and hearths unswept, There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry: Our radiant queen hates sluts and sluttery.

They are fairies, he that speaks to them shall die: I'll wink and couch: no man their works must eye.

Away, disperse: but till 'tis one o'clock, Our dance of custom round about the oak Of Herne the hunter, let us not forget.

Pray you, lock hand in hand, yourselves in order set And twenty glow-worms shall our lanterns be, To guide our measure round about the tree.

Heavens defend me from that Welsh fairy, lest he transform me to a piece of cheese! Vile worm, thou wast o'erlook'd even in thy birth.

With trial-fire touch me his finger-end: If he be chaste, the flame will back descend And turn him to no pain, but if he start, It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.

Fie on sinful fantasy! Fie on lust and luxury! Lust is but a bloody fire, Kindled with unchaste desire, Fed in heart, whose flames aspire As thoughts do blow them, higher and higher.

Pinch him, fairies, mutually, Pinch him for his villany, Pinch him, and burn him, and turn him about, Till candles and starlight and moonshine be out.

Sir John, we have had ill luck, we could never meet.

I will never take you for my love again, but I will always count you my deer.

See now how wit may be made a Jack-a-Lent, when 'tis upon ill employment! Sir John Falstaff, serve Got, and leave your desires, and fairies will not pinse you.

I will never mistrust my wife again till thou art able to woo her in good English.

Seese is not good to give putter, your belly is all putter.

'Seese' and 'putter'! have I lived to stand at the taunt of one that makes fritters of English? This is enough to be the decay of lust and late-walking through the realm.

Yet be cheerful, knight: thou shalt eat a posset to-night at my house, where I will desire thee to laugh at my wife, that now laughs at thee: tell her Master Slender hath married her daughter.

Whoa ho! ho, father Page! Son, how now! how now, son! have you dispatched? Dispatched! I'll make the best in Gloucestershire know on't, would I were hanged, la, else.

Of what, son? I came yonder at Eton to marry Mistress Anne Page, and she's a great lubberly boy.

If it had not been i' the church, I would have swinged him, or he should have swinged me.

If I did not think it had been Anne Page, would I might never stir!--and 'tis a postmaster's boy.

What need you tell me that? I think so, when I took a boy for a girl.

If I had been married to him, for all he was in woman's apparel, I would not have had Why, this is your own folly.

Good George, be not angry: I knew of your purpose, turned my daughter into green, and, indeed, she is now with the doctor at the deanery, and there married.

Vere is Mistress Page? By gar, I am cozened: I ha' married un garcon, a boy, un paysan, by gar, a boy, it is not Anne Page: by gar, I am cozened.

Why, did you take her in green? Ay, by gar, and 'tis a boy: by gar, I'll raise all Windsor.

Who hath got the right Anne? My heart misgives me: here comes Master Fenton.

You would have married her most shamefully, Where there was no proportion held in love.

The truth is, she and I, long since contracted, Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us.

Stand not amazed, here is no remedy: In love the heavens themselves do guide the state, Money buys lands, and wives are sold by fate.

I am glad, though you have ta'en a special stand to strike at me, that your arrow hath glanced.

Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy! What cannot be eschew'd must be embraced.

When night-dogs run, all sorts of deer are chased.

Master Fenton, Heaven give you many, many merry days! Good husband, let us every one go home, And laugh this sport o'er by a country fire, Sir John and all.

Sir John, To Master Brook you yet shall hold your word For he tonight shall lie with Mistress Ford.

Four days will quickly steep themselves in night, Four nights will quickly dream away the time, And then the moon, like to a silver bow New-bent in heaven, shall behold the night Of our solemnities.

Go, Philostrate, Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments, Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth, Turn melancholy forth to funerals, The pale companion is not for our pomp.

Hippolyta, I woo'd thee with my sword, And won thy love, doing thee injuries, But I will wed thee in another key, With pomp, with triumph and with revelling.

Happy be Theseus, our renowned duke! Thanks, good Egeus: what's the news with thee? Full of vexation come I, with complaint Against my child, my daughter Hermia.

My noble lord, This man hath my consent to marry her.

In himself he is, But in this kind, wanting your father's voice, The other must be held the worthier.

Either to die the death or to abjure For ever the society of men.

So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord, Ere I will my virgin patent up Unto his lordship, whose unwished yoke My soul consents not to give sovereignty.

Relent, sweet Hermia: and, Lysander, yield Thy crazed title to my certain right.

You have her father's love, Demetrius, Let me have Hermia's: do you marry him.

Scornful Lysander! true, he hath my love, And what is mine my love shall render him.

And she is mine, and all my right of her I do estate unto Demetrius.

I must confess that I have heard so much, And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof, But, being over-full of self-affairs, My mind did lose it.

But, Demetrius, come, And come, Egeus, you shall go with me, I have some private schooling for you both.

Come, my Hippolyta: what cheer, my love? Demetrius and Egeus, go along: I must employ you in some business Against our nuptial and confer with you Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.

How now, my love! why is your cheek so pale? How chance the roses there do fade so fast? Belike for want of rain, which I could well Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.

Or else misgraffed in respect of years,-- O spite! too old to be engaged to young.

Or else it stood upon the choice of friends,-- O hell! to choose love by another's eyes.

I have a widow aunt, a dowager Of great revenue, and she hath no child: From Athens is her house remote seven leagues, And she respects me as her only son.

There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee, And to that place the sharp Athenian law Cannot pursue us.

Look, here comes Helena. God speed fair Helena! whither away? Call you me fair? that fair again unsay.

Demetrius loves your fair: O happy fair! Your eyes are lode-stars, and your tongue's sweet air More tuneable than lark to shepherd's ear, When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.

Sickness is catching: O, were favour so, Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go, My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye, My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody.

Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated, The rest I'd give to be to you translated.

O, teach me how you look, and with what art You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart.

O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill! I give him curses, yet he gives me love.

O that my prayers could such affection move! The more I hate, the more he follows me.

None, but your beauty: would that fault were mine! Take comfort: he no more shall see my face, Lysander and myself will fly this place.

Farewell, sweet playfellow: pray thou for us, And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius! Keep word, Lysander: we must starve our sight From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.

Helena, adieu: As you on him, Demetrius dote on you! How happy some o'er other some can be! Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.

Is all our company here? You were best to call them generally, man by man, according to the scrip.

Here is the scroll of every man's name, which is thought fit, through all Athens, to play in our interlude before the duke and the duchess, on his wedding-day at night.

First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on, then read the names of the actors, and so grow to a point.

Marry, our play is, The most lamentable comedy, and most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisby.

A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry.

Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll.

Name what part I am for, and proceed. You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.

What is Pyramus? a lover, or a tyrant? A lover, that kills himself most gallant for love.

That will ask some tears in the true performing of it: if I do it, let the audience look to their eyes, I will move storms, I will condole in some measure.

To the rest: yet my chief humour is for a tyrant: I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a cat in, to make all split.

The raging rocks And shivering shocks Shall break the locks Of prison gates, And Phibbus' car Shall shine from far And make and mar The foolish Fates.

This is Ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein, a lover is more condoling.

What is Thisby? a wandering knight? It is the lady that Pyramus must love.

Nay, faith, let me not play a woman, I have a beard coming.

That's all one: you shall play it in a mask, and you may speak as small as you will.

An I may hide my face, let me play Thisby too, I'll speak in a monstrous little voice.

'Thisne, Thisne,' 'Ah, Pyramus, lover dear! thy Thisby dear, and lady dear!' No, no, you must play Pyramus: and, Flute, you Thisby.

You, Pyramus' father: myself, Thisby's father: Snug, the joiner, you, the lion's part: and, I hope, here is a play fitted.

Have you the lion's part written? pray you, if it be, give it me, for I am slow of study.

You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.

Let me play the lion too: I will roar, that I will do any man's heart good to hear me, I will roar, that I will make the duke say 'Let him roar again, let him roar again.

An you should do it too terribly, you would fright the duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek, and that were enough to hang us all.

What beard were I best to play it in? Why, what you will.

I will discharge it in either your straw-colour beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain beard, or your French-crown-colour beard, your perfect yellow.

Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and then you will play bare-faced.

In the meantime I will draw a bill of properties, such as our play wants.

I pray you, fail me not. We will meet, and there we may rehearse most obscenely and courageously.

Take pains, be perfect: adieu. At the duke's oak we meet.

Farewell, thou lob of spirits, I'll be gone: Our queen and all our elves come here anon.

Would that he were gone! Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.

What, jealous Oberon! Fairies, skip hence: I have forsworn his bed and company.

Do you amend it then, it lies in you: Why should Titania cross her Oberon? I do but beg a little changeling boy, To be my henchman.

Set your heart at rest: The fairy land buys not the child of me.

But she, being mortal, of that boy did die, And for her sake do I rear up her boy, And for her sake I will not part with him.

How long within this wood intend you stay? Perchance till after Theseus' wedding-day.

If you will patiently dance in our round And see our moonlight revels, go with us, If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.

Fairies, away! We shall chide downright, if I longer stay.

Well, go thy way: thou shalt not from this grove Till I torment thee for this injury.

Yet mark'd I where the bolt of Cupid fell: It fell upon a little western flower, Before milk-white, now purple with love's wound, And maidens call it love-in-idleness.

Fetch me that flower, the herb I shew'd thee once: The juice of it on sleeping eye-lids laid Will make or man or woman madly dote Upon the next live creature that it sees.

Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again Ere the leviathan can swim a league.

I'll put a girdle round about the earth In forty minutes.

Having once this juice, I'll watch Titania when she is asleep, And drop the liquor of it in her eyes.

But who comes here? I am invisible, And I will overhear their conference.

Where is Lysander and fair Hermia? The one I'll slay, the other slayeth me.

Thou told'st me they were stolen unto this wood, And here am I, and wode within this wood, Because I cannot meet my Hermia.

You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant, But yet you draw not iron, for my heart Is true as steel: leave you your power to draw, And I shall have no power to follow you.

Do I entice you? do I speak you fair? Or, rather, do I not in plainest truth Tell you, I do not, nor I cannot love you? And even for that do I love you the more.

I am your spaniel, and, Demetrius, The more you beat me, I will fawn on you: Use me but as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me, Neglect me, lose me, only give me leave, Unworthy as I am, to follow you.

I will not stay thy questions, let me go: Or, if thou follow me, do not believe But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.

Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field, You do me mischief.

Fie, Demetrius! Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex: We cannot fight for love, as men may do, We should be wood and were not made to woo.

I'll follow thee and make a heaven of hell, To die upon the hand I love so well.

Fare thee well, nymph: ere he do leave this grove, Thou shalt fly him and he shall seek thy love.

Re-enter PUCK Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.

Effect it with some care, that he may prove More fond on her than she upon her love: And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.

Sing me now asleep, Then to your offices and let me rest.

The Fairies sing You spotted snakes with double tongue, Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen, Newts and blind-worms, do no wrong, Come not near our fairy queen.

Philomel, with melody Sing in our sweet lullaby, Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby: Never harm, Nor spell nor charm, Come our lovely lady nigh, So, good night, with lullaby.

Weaving spiders, come not here, Hence, you long-legg'd spinners, hence! Beetles black, approach not near, Worm nor snail, do no offence.

Hence, away! now all is well: One aloof stand sentinel.

Fair love, you faint with wandering in the wood, And to speak troth, I have forgot our way: We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good, And tarry for the comfort of the day.

Be it so, Lysander: find you out a bed, For I upon this bank will rest my head.

One turf shall serve as pillow for us both, One heart, one bed, two bosoms and one troth.

Nay, good Lysander, for my sake, my dear, Lie further off yet, do not lie so near.

O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence! Love takes the meaning in love's conference.

I mean, that my heart unto yours is knit So that but one heart we can make of it, Two bosoms interchained with an oath, So then two bosoms and a single troth.

Then by your side no bed-room me deny, For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.

Lysander riddles very prettily: Now much beshrew my manners and my pride, If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied.

But Athenian found I none, On whose eyes I might approve This flower's force in stirring love.

-Who is here? Weeds of Athens he doth wear: This is he, my master said, Despised the Athenian maid, And here the maiden, sleeping sound, On the dank and dirty ground.

Pretty soul! she durst not lie Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.

Churl, upon thy eyes I throw All the power this charm doth owe.

When thou wakest, let love forbid Sleep his seat on thy eyelid: So awake when I am gone, For I must now to Oberon.

O, I am out of breath in this fond chase! The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.

Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies, For she hath blessed and attractive eyes.

How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears: If so, my eyes are oftener wash'd than hers.

No, no, I am as ugly as a bear, For beasts that meet me run away for fear: Therefore no marvel though Demetrius Do, as a monster fly my presence thus.

What wicked and dissembling glass of mine Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne? But who is here? Lysander! on the ground! Dead? or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.

Transparent Helena! Nature shows art, That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.

Content with Hermia! No, I do repent The tedious minutes I with her have spent.

Not Hermia but Helena I love: Who will not change a raven for a dove? The will of man is by his reason sway'd, And reason says you are the worthier maid.

But fare you well: perforce I must confess I thought you lord of more true gentleness.

Should of another therefore be abused! She sees not Hermia.

Lysander! what, removed? Lysander! lord! What, out of hearing? gone? no sound, no word? Alack, where are you speak, an if you hear, Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.

No? then I well perceive you all not nigh Either death or you I'll find immediately.

Are we all met? Pat, pat, and here's a marvellous convenient place for our rehearsal.

This green plot shall be our stage, this hawthorn-brake our tiring-house, and we will do it in action as we will do it before the duke.

Peter Quince,-- What sayest thou, bully Bottom? There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisby that will never please.

First, Pyramus must draw a sword to kill himself, which the ladies cannot abide.

I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.

Well, we will have such a prologue, and it shall be written in eight and six.

No, make it two more, let it be written in eight and eight.

Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion? I fear it, I promise you.

Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.

If you think I come hither as a lion, it were pity of my life: no I am no such thing, I am a man as other men are,' and there indeed let him name his name, and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner.

But there is two hard things, that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber, for, you know, Pyramus and Thisby meet by moonlight.

Doth the moon shine that night we play our play? A calendar, a calendar! look in the almanac, find out moonshine, find out moonshine.

Why, then may you leave a casement of the great chamber window, where we play, open, and the moon may shine in at the casement.

Ay, or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lanthorn, and say he comes to disfigure, or to present, the person of Moonshine.

Then, there is another thing: we must have a wall in the great chamber, for Pyramus and Thisby says the story, did talk through the chink of a wall.

Come, sit  down, every mother's son, and rehearse your parts.

Pyramus, you begin: when you have spoken your speech, enter into that brake: and so every one according to his cue.

What hempen home-spuns have we swaggering here, So near the cradle of the fairy queen? What, a play toward! I'll be an auditor, An actor too, perhaps, if I see cause.

Thisby, stand forth. Thisby, the flowers of odious savours sweet,-- Odours, odours.

--odours savours sweet: So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisby dear.

But hark, a voice! stay thou but here awhile, And by and by I will to thee appear.

Must I speak now? Ay, marry, must you, for you must understand he goes but to see a noise that he heard, and is to come again.

'Ninus' tomb,' man: why, you must not speak that yet, that you answer to Pyramus: you speak all your part at once, cues and all Pyramus enter: your cue is past, it is, 'never tire.

O,--As true as truest horse, that yet would never tire.

Re-enter PUCK, and BOTTOM with an ass's head If I were fair, Thisby, I were only thine.

Why do they run away? this is a knavery of them to make me afeard.

But I will not stir from this place, do what they can: I will walk up and down here, and I will sing, that they shall hear I am not afraid.

Nay, I can gleek upon occasion. Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.

Not so, neither: but if I had wit enough to get out of this wood, I have enough to serve mine own turn.

Out of this wood do not desire to go: Thou shalt remain here, whether thou wilt or no.

Peaseblossom! Cobweb! Moth! and Mustardseed! And I.

Hail, mortal! I cry your worship's mercy, heartily: I beseech your worship's name.

I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good Master Cobweb: if I cut my finger, I shall make bold with you.

Your name, honest gentleman? I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your mother, and to Master Peascod, your father.

Good Master Peaseblossom, I shall desire you of more acquaintance too.

I desire your more acquaintance, good Master Come, wait upon him, lead him to my bower.

The moon methinks looks with a watery eye, And when she weeps, weeps every little flower, Lamenting some enforced chastity.

I wonder if Titania be awaked, Then, what it was that next came in her eye, Which she must dote on in extremity.

How now, mad spirit! What night-rule now about this haunted grove? My mistress with a monster is in love.

I led them on in this distracted fear, And left sweet Pyramus translated there: When in that moment, so it came to pass, Titania waked and straightway loved an ass.

O, why rebuke you him that loves you so? Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.

Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse, For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse, If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep, Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep, And kill me too.

It cannot be but thou hast murder'd him, So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.

So should the murder'd look, and so should I, Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty: Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear, As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.

What's this to my Lysander? where is he? Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me? I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.

Out, dog! out, cur! thou drivest me past the bounds Of maiden's patience.

You spend your passion on a misprised mood: I am not guilty of Lysander's blood, Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.

An if I could, what should I get therefore? A privilege never to see me more.

And from thy hated presence part I so: See me no more, whether he be dead or no.

There is no following her in this fierce vein: Here therefore for a while I will remain.

So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow For debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe: Which now in some slight measure it will pay, If for his tender here I make some stay.

Then fate o'er-rules, that, one man holding troth, A million fail, confounding oath on oath.

I go, I go, look how I go, Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.

Flower of this purple dye, Hit with Cupid's archery, Sink in apple of his eye.

When his love he doth espy, Let her shine as gloriously As the Venus of the sky.

When thou wakest, if she be by, Beg of her for remedy.

Re-enter PUCK Captain of our fairy band, Helena is here at hand, And the youth, mistook by me, Pleading for a lover's fee.

Shall we their fond pageant see? Lord, what fools these mortals be! Stand aside: the noise they make Will cause Demetrius to awake.

Then will two at once woo one, That must needs be sport alone, And those things do best please me That befal preposterously.

Why should you think that I should woo in scorn? Scorn and derision never come in tears: Look, when I vow, I weep, and vows so born, In their nativity all truth appears.

How can these things in me seem scorn to you, Bearing the badge of faith, to prove them true? You do advance your cunning more and more.

To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne? Crystal is muddy.

Lysander, keep thy Hermia, I will none: If e'er I loved her, all that love is gone.

My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourn'd, And now to Helen is it home return'd, There to remain.

Disparage not the faith thou dost not know, Lest, to thy peril, thou aby it dear.

Re-enter HERMIA Dark night, that from the eye his function takes, The ear more quick of apprehension makes, Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense, It pays the hearing double recompense.

Why seek'st thou me? could not this make thee know, The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so? You speak not as you think: it cannot be.

Lo, she is one of this confederacy! Now I perceive they have conjoin'd all three To fashion this false sport, in spite of me.

Ay, do, persever, counterfeit sad looks, Make mouths upon me when I turn my back, Wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up: This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.

If you have any pity, grace, or manners, You would not make me such an argument.

But fare ye well: 'tis partly my own fault, Which death or absence soon shall remedy.

Stay, gentle Helena, hear my excuse: My love, my life my soul, fair Helena! O excellent! Sweet, do not scorn her so.

Thou canst compel no more than she entreat: Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers.

Helen, I love thee, by my life, I do: I swear by that which I will lose for thee, To prove him false that says I love thee not.

I would I had your bond, for I perceive A weak bond holds you: I'll not trust your word.

What, should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead? Although I hate her, I'll not harm her so.

What, can you do me greater harm than hate? Hate me! wherefore? O me! what news, my love! Am not I Hermia? are not you Lysander? I am as fair now as I was erewhile.

Since night you loved me, yet since night you left Why, then you left me--O, the gods forbid!-- In earnest, shall I say? Ay, by my life, And never did desire to see thee more.

Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt, Be certain, nothing truer, 'tis no jest That I do hate thee and love Helena.

Now I perceive that she hath made compare Between our statures, she hath urged her height, And with her personage, her tall personage, Her height, forsooth, she hath prevail'd with him.

And are you grown so high in his esteem, Because I am so dwarfish and so low? How low am I, thou painted maypole? speak, How low am I? I am not yet so low But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.

I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen, Let her not hurt me: I was never curst, I have no gift at all in shrewishness, I am a right maid for my cowardice: Let her not strike me.

You perhaps may think, Because she is something lower than myself, That I can match her.

I evermore did love you, Hermia, Did ever keep your counsels, never wrong'd you, Save that, in love unto Demetrius, I told him of your stealth unto this wood.

Why, get you gone: who is't that hinders you? A foolish heart, that I leave here behind.

O, when she's angry, she is keen and shrewd! She was a vixen when she went to school, And though she be but little, she is fierce.

'Little' again! nothing but 'low' and 'little'! Why will you suffer her to flout me thus? Let me come to her.

Get you gone, you dwarf, You minimus, of hindering knot-grass made, You bead, you acorn.

You are too officious In her behalf that scorns your services.

Let her alone: speak not of Helena, Take not her part, for, if thou dost intend Never so little show of love to her, Thou shalt aby it.

Now she holds me not, Now follow, if thou darest, to try whose right, Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.

You, mistress, all this coil is 'long of you: Nay, go not back.

I will not trust you, I, Nor longer stay in your curst company.

Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray, My legs are longer though, to run away.

This is thy negligence: still thou mistakest, Or else committ'st thy knaveries wilfully.

When they next wake, all this derision Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision, And back to Athens shall the lovers wend, With league whose date till death shall never end.

Whiles I in this affair do thee employ, I'll to my queen and beg her Indian boy, And then I will her charmed eye release From monster's view, and all things shall be peace.

But, notwithstanding, haste, make no delay: We may effect this business yet ere day.

Up and down, up and down, I will lead them up and down: I am fear'd in field and town: Goblin, lead them up and down.

Re-enter LYSANDER Where art thou, proud Demetrius? speak thou now.

Yea, art thou there? Follow my voice: we'll try no manhood here.

Re-enter LYSANDER He goes before me and still dares me on: When I come where he calls, then he is gone.

The villain is much lighter-heel'd than I: I follow'd fast, but faster he did fly, That fallen am I in dark uneven way, And here will rest me.

Lies down Come, thou gentle day! For if but once thou show me thy grey light, I'll find Demetrius and revenge this spite.

Thou shalt buy this dear, If ever I thy face by daylight see: Now, go thy way.

Faintness constraineth me To measure out my length on this cold bed.

Lies down and sleeps Yet but three? Come one more, Two of both kinds make up four.

Here she comes, curst and sad: Cupid is a knavish lad, Thus to make poor females mad.

Re-enter HERMIA Never so weary, never so in woe, Bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers, I can no further crawl, no further go, My legs can keep no pace with my desires.

Heavens shield Lysander, if they mean a fray! Lies down and sleeps On the ground Sleep sound: I'll apply To your eye, Gentle lover, remedy.

Come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed, While I thy amiable cheeks do coy, And stick musk-roses in thy sleek smooth head, And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.

Where's Peaseblossom? Scratch my head Peaseblossom.

Where's Mounsieur Cobweb? Mounsieur Cobweb, good mounsieur, get you your weapons in your hand, and kill me a red-hipped humble-bee on the top of a thistle, and, good mounsieur, bring me the honey-bag.

Do not fret yourself too much in the action, mounsieur, and, good mounsieur, have a care the honey-bag break not, I would be loath to have you overflown with a honey-bag, signior.

Where's Mounsieur Mustardseed? Give me your neaf, Mounsieur Mustardseed.

What's your Will? Nothing, good mounsieur, but to help Cavalery Cobweb to scratch.

I must to the barber's, monsieur, for methinks I am marvellous hairy about the face, and I am such a tender ass, if my hair do but tickle me, I must scratch.

What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love? I have a reasonable good ear in music.

Truly, a peck of provender: I could munch your good dry oats.

Methinks I have a great desire to a bottle of hay: good hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow.

I have a venturous fairy that shall seek The squirrel's hoard, and fetch thee new nuts.

But, I pray you, let none of your people stir me: I have an exposition of sleep come upon me.

So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle Gently entwist, the female ivy so Enrings the barky fingers of the elm.

Be as thou wast wont to be, See as thou wast wont to see: Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower Hath such force and blessed power.

My Oberon! what visions have I seen! Methought I was enamour'd of an ass.

How came these things to pass? O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now! Silence awhile.

Robin, take off this head. Titania, music call, and strike more dead Than common sleep of all these five the sense.

Music, ho! music, such as charmeth sleep! Music, still Now, when thou wakest, with thine own fool's eyes peep.

Sound, music! Come, my queen, take hands with me, And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.

Fairy king, attend, and mark: I do hear the morning lark.

Then, my queen, in silence sad, Trip we after the night's shade: We the globe can compass soon, Swifter than the wandering moon.

Come, my lord, and in our flight Tell me how it came this night That I sleeping here was found With these mortals on the ground.

Horns winded within Go, one of you, find out the forester, For now our observation is perform'd, And since we have the vaward of the day, My love shall hear the music of my hounds.

Uncouple in the western valley, let them go: Dispatch, I say, and find the forester.

We will, fair queen, up to the mountain's top, And mark the musical confusion Of hounds and echo in conjunction.

A cry more tuneable Was never holla'd to, nor cheer'd with horn, In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly: Judge when you hear.

But, soft! what nymphs are these? My lord, this is my daughter here asleep, And this, Lysander, this Demetrius is, This Helena, old Nedar's Helena: I wonder of their being here together.

No doubt they rose up early to observe The rite of May, and hearing our intent, Came here in grace our solemnity.

But speak, Egeus, is not this the day That Hermia should give answer of her choice? It is, my lord.

LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HELENA, and HERMIA wake and start up Good morrow, friends.

Saint Valentine is past: Begin these wood-birds but to couple now? Pardon, my lord.

Enough, enough, my lord, you have enough: I beg the law, the law, upon his head.

They would have stolen away, they would, Demetrius, Thereby to have defeated you and me, You of your wife and me of my consent, Of my consent that she should be your wife.

My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth, Of this their purpose hither to this wood, And I in fury hither follow'd them, Fair Helena in fancy following me.

Fair lovers, you are fortunately met: Of this discourse we more will hear anon.

Egeus, I will overbear your will, For in the temple by and by with us These couples shall eternally be knit: And, for the morning now is something worn, Our purposed hunting shall be set aside.

Away with us to Athens, three and three, We'll hold a feast in great solemnity.

These things seem small and undistinguishable, Methinks I see these things with parted eye, When every thing seems double.

So methinks: And I have found Demetrius like a jewel, Mine own, and not mine own.

Are you sure That we are awake? It seems to me That yet we sleep, we dream.

Do not you think The duke was here, and bid us follow him? Yea, and my father.

Why, then, we are awake: let's follow him And by the way let us recount our dreams.

Heigh-ho! Peter Quince! Flute, the bellows-mender! Snout, the tinker! Starveling! God's my life, stolen hence, and left me asleep! I have had a most rare vision.

I have had a dream, past the wit of man to say what dream it was: man is but an ass, if he go about to expound this dream.

Methought I was,--and methought I had,--but man is but a patched fool, if he will offer to say what methought I had.

The eye of man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not seen, man's hand is not able to taste, his tongue to conceive, nor his heart to report, what my dream was.

Have you sent to Bottom's house ? is he come home yet? He cannot be heard of.

Out of doubt he is If he come not, then the play is marred: it goes not forward, doth it? It is not possible: you have not a man in all Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he.

No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in Athens.

Yea and the best person too, and he is a very paramour for a sweet voice.

You must say 'paragon:' a paramour is, God bless us, a thing of naught.

Where are these lads? where are these hearts? Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour! Masters, I am to discourse wonders: but ask me not what, for if I tell you, I am no true Athenian.

I will tell you every thing, right as it fell out.

All that I will tell you is, that the duke hath dined.

Get your apparel together, good strings to your beards, new ribbons to your pumps, meet presently at the palace, every man look o'er his part, for the short and the long is, our play is preferred.

In any case, let Thisby have clean linen, and let not him that plays the lion pair his nails, for they shall hang out for the lion's claws.

And, most dear actors, eat no onions nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet breath, and I do not doubt but to hear them say, it is a sweet comedy.

No more words: away! go, away! 'Tis strange my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.

More strange than true: I never may believe These antique fables, nor these fairy toys.

Lovers and madmen have such seething brains, Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend More than cool reason ever comprehends.

We'll none of that: that have I told my love, In glory of my kinsman Hercules.

'The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals, Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage.

That is an old device, and it was play'd When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.

'The thrice three Muses mourning for the death Of Learning, late deceased in beggary.

That is some satire, keen and critical, Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.

'A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus And his love Thisbe, very tragical mirth.

Merry and tragical! tedious and brief! That is, hot ice and wondrous strange snow.

Which, when I saw rehearsed, I must confess, Made mine eyes water, but more merry tears The passion of loud laughter never shed.

I will hear that play, For never anything can be amiss, When simpleness and duty tender it.

I love not to see wretchedness o'er charged And duty in his service perishing.

Our sport shall be to take what they mistake: And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect Takes it in might, not merit.

Trust me, sweet, Out of this silence yet I pick'd a welcome, And in the modesty of fearful duty I read as much as from the rattling tongue Of saucy and audacious eloquence.

Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity In least speak most, to my capacity.

Re-enter PHILOSTRATE So please your grace, the Prologue is address'd.

Flourish of trumpets If we offend, it is with our good will.

That you should think, we come not to offend, But with good will.

To show our simple skill, That is the true beginning of our end.

We do not come as minding to contest you, Our true intent is.

That you should here repent you, The actors are at hand and by their show You shall know all that you are like to know.

He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt, he knows not the stop.

A good moral, my lord: it is not enough to speak, but to speak true.

Indeed he hath played on his prologue like a child on a recorder, a sound, but not in government.

His speech, was like a tangled chain, nothing impaired, but all disordered.

Who is next? Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show, But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.

This man is Pyramus, if you would know, This beauteous lady Thisby is certain.

This man, with lime and rough-cast, doth present Wall, that vile Wall which did these lovers sunder, And through Wall's chink, poor souls, they are content To whisper.

For all the rest, Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain At large discourse, while here they do remain.

No wonder, my lord: one lion may, when many asses do.

This loam, this rough-cast and this stone doth show That I am that same wall, the truth is so: And this the cranny is, right and sinister, Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.

Would you desire lime and hair to speak better? It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard discourse, my lord.

O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss! Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me! The wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse again.

'Deceiving me' is Thisby's cue: she is to enter now, and I am to spy her through the wall.

Yonder she comes. O wall, full often hast thou heard my moans, For parting my fair Pyramus and me! My cherry lips have often kiss'd thy stones, Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.

I see a voice: now will I to the chink, To spy an I can hear my Thisby's face.

Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover's grace, And, like Limander, am I trusty still.

O kiss me through the hole of this vile wall! I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all.

Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway? 'Tide life, 'tide death, I come without delay.

Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so, And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.

No remedy, my lord, when walls are so wilful to hear without warning.

The best in this kind are but shadows, and the worst are no worse, if imagination amend them.

If we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves, they may pass for excellent men.

You, ladies, you, whose gentle hearts do fear The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor, May now perchance both quake and tremble here, When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.

Then know that I, one Snug the joiner, am A lion-fell, nor else no lion's dam, For, if I should as lion come in strife Into this place, 'twere pity on my life.

The very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er I saw.

Not so, my lord, for his valour cannot carry his discretion, and the fox carries the goose.

His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his valour, for the goose carries not the fox.

It is well: leave it to his discretion, and let us listen to the moon.

This lanthorn doth the horned moon present,-- He should have worn the horns on his head.

He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible within the circumference.

This lanthorn doth the horned moon present, Myself the man i' the moon do seem to be.

This is the greatest error of all the rest: the man should be put into the lanthorn.

How is it else the man i' the moon? He dares not come there for the candle, for, you see, it is already in snuff.

I am aweary of this moon: would he would change! It appears, by his small light of discretion, that he is in the wane, but yet, in courtesy, in all reason, we must stay the time.

All that I have to say, is, to tell you that the lanthorn is the moon, I, the man in the moon, this thorn-bush, my thorn-bush, and this dog, my dog.

Why, all these should be in the lanthorn, for all these are in the moon.

But, silence! here comes Thisbe. This is old Ninny's tomb.

Where is my love? Thisbe runs off Well roared, Lion.

The Lion shakes Thisbe's mantle, and exit Well moused, Lion.

Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams, I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright, For, by thy gracious, golden, glittering gleams, I trust to take of truest Thisby sight.

O wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame? Since lion vile hath here deflower'd my dear: Which is--no, no--which was the fairest dame That lived, that loved, that liked, that look'd with cheer.

Come, tears, confound, Out, sword, and wound The pap of Pyramus, Ay, that left pap, Where heart doth hop: Stabs himself Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.

Now am I dead, Now am I fled, My soul is in the sky: Tongue, lose thy light, Moon take thy flight: Now die, die, die, die, die.

Less than an ace, man, for he is dead, he is nothing.

With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover, and prove an ass.

How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisbe comes back and finds her lover? She will find him by starlight.

Re-enter Thisbe Methinks she should not use a long one for such a Pyramus: I hope she will be brief.

A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which Thisbe, is the better, he for a man, God warrant us, she for a woman, God bless us.

And thus she means, videlicet:-- Asleep, my love? What, dead, my dove? O Pyramus, arise! Speak, speak.

Quite dumb? Dead, dead? A tomb Must cover thy sweet eyes.

These My lips, This cherry nose, These yellow cowslip cheeks, Are gone, are gone: Lovers, make moan: His eyes were green as leeks.

O Sisters Three, Come, come to me, With hands as pale as milk, Lay them in gore, Since you have shore With shears his thread of silk.

Tongue, not a word: Come, trusty sword, Come, blade, my breast imbrue: Stabs herself And, farewell, friends, Thus Thisby ends: Adieu, adieu, adieu.

Will it please you to see the epilogue, or to hear a Bergomask dance between two of our company? No epilogue, I pray you, for your play needs no excuse.

Never excuse, for when the players are all dead, there needs none to be blamed.

Marry, if he that writ it had played Pyramus and hanged himself in Thisbe's garter, it would have been a fine tragedy: and so it is, truly, and very notably discharged.

But come, your Bergomask: let your epilogue alone.

A dance The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve: Lovers, to bed, 'tis almost fairy time.

I fear we shall out-sleep the coming morn As much as we this night have overwatch'd.

This palpable-gross play hath well beguiled The heavy gait of night.

Sweet friends, to bed. A fortnight hold we this solemnity, In nightly revels and new jollity.

Now the hungry lion roars, And the wolf behowls the moon, Whilst the heavy ploughman snores, All with weary task fordone.

Now the wasted brands do glow, Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud, Puts the wretch that lies in woe In remembrance of a shroud.

Through the house give gathering light, By the dead and drowsy fire: Every elf and fairy sprite Hop as light as bird from brier, And this ditty, after me, Sing, and dance it trippingly.

First, rehearse your song by rote To each word a warbling note: Hand in hand, with fairy grace, Will we sing, and bless this place.

Song and dance Now, until the break of day, Through this house each fairy stray.

To the best bride-bed will we, Which by us shall blessed be, And the issue there create Ever shall be fortunate.

With this field-dew consecrate, Every fairy take his gait, And each several chamber bless, Through this palace, with sweet peace, And the owner of it blest Ever shall in safety rest.

Trip away, make no stay, Meet me all by break of day.

If we shadows have offended, Think but this, and all is mended, That you have but slumber'd here While these visions did appear.

Give me your hands, if we be friends, And Robin shall restore amends.

I learn in this letter that Don Peter of Arragon comes this night to Messina.

He is very near by this: he was not three leagues off when I left him.

How many gentlemen have you lost in this action? But few of any sort, and none of name.

A victory is twice itself when the achiever brings home full numbers.

I find here that Don Peter hath bestowed much honour on a young Florentine called Claudio.

He hath an uncle here in Messina will be very much glad of it.

I have already delivered him letters, and there appears much joy in him, even so much that joy could not show itself modest enough without a badge of Did he break out into tears? In great measure.

A kind overflow of kindness: there are no faces truer than those that are so washed.

How much better is it to weep at joy than to joy at weeping! I pray you, is Signior Mountanto returned from the wars or no? I know none of that name, lady: there was none such in the army of any sort.

What is he that you ask for, niece? My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua.

He set up his bills here in Messina and challenged Cupid at the flight, and my uncle's fool, reading the challenge, subscribed for Cupid, and challenged him at the bird-bolt.

I pray you, how many hath he killed and eaten in these wars? But how many hath he killed? for indeed I promised to eat all of his killing.

Faith, niece, you tax Signior Benedick too much, but he'll be meet with you, I doubt it not.

You had musty victual, and he hath holp to eat it: he is a very valiant trencherman, he hath an excellent stomach.

And a good soldier to a lady: but what is he to a lord? A lord to a lord, a man to a man, stuffed with all honourable virtues.

It is so, indeed, he is no less than a stuffed man: but for the stuffing,--well, we are all mortal.

There is a kind of merry war betwixt Signior Benedick and her: they never meet but there's a skirmish of wit between them.

Who is his companion now? He hath every month a new sworn brother.

Is't possible? Very easily possible: he wears his faith but as the fashion of his hat, it ever changes with the next block.

But, I pray you, who is his companion? Is there no young squarer now that will make a voyage with him to the devil? He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio.

O Lord, he will hang upon him like a disease: he is sooner caught than the pestilence, and the taker runs presently mad.

God help the noble Claudio! if he have caught the Benedick, it will cost him a thousand pound ere a' be cured.

Good Signior Leonato, you are come to meet your trouble: the fashion of the world is to avoid cost, and you encounter it.

Never came trouble to my house in the likeness of your grace: for trouble being gone, comfort should remain, but when you depart from me, sorrow abides and happiness takes his leave.

Were you in doubt, sir, that you asked her? Signior Benedick, no, for then were you a child.

You have it full, Benedick: we may guess by this what you are, being a man.

Be happy, lady, for you are like an honourable father.

If Signior Leonato be her father, she would not have his head on her shoulders for all Messina, as like him as she is.

I wonder that you will still be talking, Signior Benedick: nobody marks you.

But it is certain I am loved of all ladies, only you excepted: and I would I could find in my heart that I had not a hard heart, for, truly, I love none.

A dear happiness to women: they would else have been troubled with a pernicious suitor.

I thank God and my cold blood, I am of your humour for that: I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow than a man swear he loves me.

God keep your ladyship still in that mind! so some gentleman or other shall 'scape a predestinate scratched face.

Scratching could not make it worse, an 'twere such a face as yours were.

A bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours.

I would my horse had the speed of your tongue, and so good a continuer.

You always end with a jade's trick: I know you of old.

Signior Claudio and Signior Benedick, my dear friend Leonato hath invited you all.

I tell him we shall stay here at the least a month, and he heartily prays some occasion may detain us longer.

I dare swear he is no hypocrite, but prays from his heart.

To DON JOHN Let me bid you welcome, my lord: being reconciled to the prince your brother, I owe you all duty.

I thank you: I am not of many words, but I thank Please it your grace lead on? Your hand, Leonato, we will go together.

Benedick, didst thou note the daughter of Signior Leonato? I noted her not, but I looked on her.

Thou thinkest I am in sport: I pray thee tell me truly how thou likest her.

Would you buy her, that you inquire after her? Can the world buy such a jewel? Yea, and a case to put it into.

I can see yet without spectacles and I see no such matter: there's her cousin, an she were not possessed with a fury, exceeds her as much in beauty as the first of May doth the last of December.

But I hope you have no intent to turn husband, have you? I would scarce trust myself, though I had sworn the contrary, if Hero would be my wife.

Look Don Pedro is returned to seek you. Re-enter DON PEDRO What secret hath held you here, that you followed not to Leonato's? I would your grace would constrain me to tell.

You hear, Count Claudio: I can be secret as a dumb man, I would have you think so, but, on my allegiance, mark you this, on my allegiance.

With who? now that is your grace's part. Mark how short his answer is,--With Hero, Leonato's short daughter.

Like the old tale, my lord: 'it is not so, nor 'twas not so, but, indeed, God forbid it should be If my passion change not shortly, God forbid it should be otherwise.

Amen, if you love her, for the lady is very well worthy.

And, by my two faiths and troths, my lord, I spoke mine.

That I neither feel how she should be loved nor know how she should be worthy, is the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me: I will die in it at the stake.

Thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of beauty.

And never could maintain his part but in the force of his will.

Because I will not do them the wrong to mistrust any, I will do myself the right to trust none, and the fine is, for the which I may go the finer, I will live a bachelor.

Well, if ever thou dost fall from this faith, thou wilt prove a notable argument.

If I do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot at me, and he that hits me, let him be clapped on the shoulder, and called Adam.

Well, as time shall try: 'In time the savage bull doth bear the yoke.

If this should ever happen, thou wouldst be horn-mad.

Nay, if Cupid have not spent all his quiver in Venice, thou wilt quake for this shortly.

In the meantime, good Signior Benedick, repair to Leonato's: commend me to him and tell him I will not fail him at supper, for indeed he hath made great preparation.

I have almost matter enough in me for such an embassage, and so I commit you-- To the tuition of God: From my house, if I had it,-- The sixth of July: Your loving friend, Benedick.

The body of your discourse is sometime guarded with fragments, and the guards are but slightly basted on neither: ere you flout old ends any further, examine your conscience: and so I leave you.

My love is thine to teach: teach it but how, And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn Any hard lesson that may do thee good.

Hath Leonato any son, my lord? No child but Hero, she's his only heir.

Thou wilt be like a lover presently And tire the hearer with a book of words.

If thou dost love fair Hero, cherish it, And I will break with her and with her father, And thou shalt have her.

What need the bridge much broader than the flood? The fairest grant is the necessity.

Look, what will serve is fit: 'tis once, thou lovest, And I will fit thee with the remedy.

How now, brother! Where is my cousin, your son? hath he provided this music? He is very busy about it.

But, brother, I can tell you strange news that you yet dreamt not of.

Are they good? As the event stamps them: but they have a good cover, they show well outward.

Hath the fellow any wit that told you this? A good sharp fellow: I will send for him, and question him yourself.

No, no, we will hold it as a dream till it appear itself: but I will acquaint my daughter withal, that she may be the better prepared for an answer, if peradventure this be true.

Go you and tell her of it. Cousins, you know what you have to do.

O, I cry you mercy, friend, go you with me, and I will use your skill.

Good cousin, have a care this busy time. What the good-year, my lord! why are you thus out of measure sad? There is no measure in the occasion that breeds, therefore the sadness is without limit.

Yea, but you must not make the full show of this till you may do it without controlment.

I am trusted with a muzzle and enfranchised with a clog, therefore I have decreed not to sing in my cage.

If I had my mouth, I would bite, if I had my liberty, I would do my liking: in the meantime let me be that I am and seek not to alter me.

Can you make no use of your discontent? I make all use of it, for I use it only.

Who comes here? What news, Borachio? I came yonder from a great supper: the prince your brother is royally entertained by Leonato: and I can give you intelligence of an intended marriage.

Will it serve for any model to build mischief on? What is he for a fool that betroths himself to Marry, it is your brother's right hand.

A proper squire! And who, and who? which way looks Marry, on Hero, the daughter and heir of Leonato.

Come, come, let us thither: this may prove food to my displeasure.

That young start-up hath all the glory of my overthrow: if I can cross him any way, I bless myself every way.

You are both sure, and will assist me? To the death, my lord.

Let us to the great supper: their cheer is the greater that I am subdued.

Would the cook were of my mind! Shall we go prove what's to be done? We'll wait upon your lordship.

How tartly that gentleman looks! I never can see him but I am heart-burned an hour after.

He were an excellent man that were made just in the midway between him and Benedick: the one is too like an image and says nothing, and the other too like my lady's eldest son, evermore tattling.

By my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a husband, if thou be so shrewd of thy tongue.

Too curst is more than curst: I shall lessen God's sending that way, for it is said, 'God sends a curst cow short horns,' but to a cow too curst he sends none.

So, by being too curst, God will send you no horns.

Just, if he send me no husband, for the which blessing I am at him upon my knees every morning and evening.

Lord, I could not endure a husband with a beard on his face: I had rather lie in the woollen.

Yes, faith, it is my cousin's duty to make curtsy and say 'Father, as it please you.

But yet for all that, cousin, let him be a handsome fellow, or else make another curtsy and say 'Father, as it please Well, niece, I hope to see you one day fitted with a husband.

Not till God make men of some other metal than earth.

Daughter, remember what I told you: if the prince do solicit you in that kind, you know your answer.

The fault will be in the music, cousin, if you be not wooed in good time: if the prince be too important, tell him there is measure in every thing and so dance out the answer.

I have a good eye, uncle, I can see a church by daylight.

The revellers are entering, brother: make good room.

All put on their masks Lady, will you walk about with your friend? So you walk softly and look sweetly and say nothing, I am yours for the walk, and especially when I walk away.

With me in your company? I may say so, when I please.

And when please you to say so? When I like your favour, for God defend the lute should be like the case! My visor is Philemon's roof, within the house is Jove.

So would not I, for your own sake, for I have many Which is one? I say my prayers aloud.

God match me with a good dancer! And God keep him out of my sight when the dance is done! Answer, clerk.

You could never do him so ill-well, unless you were the very man.

Here's his dry hand up and down: you are he, you are he.

That I was disdainful, and that I had my good wit out of the 'Hundred Merry Tales:'--well this was Signior Benedick that said so.

I am sure he is in the fleet: I would he had boarded me.

When I know the gentleman, I'll tell him what you say.

Nay, if they lead to any ill, I will leave them at the next turning.

Then exeunt all except DON JOHN, BORACHIO, and CLAUDIO Sure my brother is amorous on Hero and hath withdrawn her father to break with him about it.

Are not you Signior Benedick? You know me well, I am he.

Signior, you are very near my brother in his love: he is enamoured on Hero, I pray you, dissuade him from her: she is no equal for his birth: you may do the part of an honest man in it.

How know you he loves her? I heard him swear his affection.

So did I too, and he swore he would marry her to-night.

Thus answer I in the name of Benedick, But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio.

This is an accident of hourly proof, Which I mistrusted not.

Farewell, therefore, Hero! Re-enter BENEDICK Count Claudio? Yea, the same.

Come, will you go with me? Even to the next willow, about your own business, county.

What fashion will you wear the garland of? about your neck, like an usurer's chain? or under your arm, like a lieutenant's scarf? You must wear it one way, for the prince hath got your Hero.

Why, that's spoken like an honest drovier: so they sell bullocks.

But did you think the prince would have served you thus? I pray you, leave me.

Ho! now you strike like the blind man: 'twas the boy that stole your meat, and you'll beat the post.

Alas, poor hurt fowl! now will he creep into sedges.

But that my Lady Beatrice should know me, and not know me! The prince's fool! Ha? It may be I go under that title because I am merry.

Yea, but so I am apt to do myself wrong, I am not so reputed: it is the base, though bitter, disposition of Beatrice that puts the world into her person and so gives me out.

Well, I'll be revenged as I may. Re-enter DON PEDRO Now, signior, where's the count? did you see him? Troth, my lord, I have played the part of Lady Fame.

To be whipped! What's his fault? The flat transgression of a schoolboy, who, being overjoyed with finding a birds' nest, shows it his companion, and he steals it.

Wilt thou make a trust a transgression? The transgression is in the stealer.

I will but teach them to sing, and restore them to the owner.

If their singing answer your saying, by my faith, you say honestly.

The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrel to you: the gentleman that danced with her told her she is much wronged by you.

O, she misused me past the endurance of a block! an oak but with one green leaf on it would have answered her, my very visor began to assume life and scold with her.

She speaks poniards, and every word stabs: if her breath were as terrible as her terminations, there were no living near her, she would infect to the north star.

I would not marry her, though she were endowed with all that Adam bad left him before he transgressed: she would have made Hercules have turned spit, yea, and have cleft his club to make the fire too.

Come, talk not of her: you shall find her the infernal Ate in good apparel.

You have no employment for me? None, but to desire your good company.

O God, sir, here's a dish I love not: I cannot endure my Lady Tongue.

Come, lady, come, you have lost the heart of Signior Benedick.

You have put him down, lady, you have put him down.

So I would not he should do me, my lord, lest I should prove the mother of fools.

I have brought Count Claudio, whom you sent me to seek.

Why, how now, count! wherefore are you sad? Not sad, my lord.

The count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor well, but civil count, civil as an orange, and something of that jealous complexion.

I' faith, lady, I think your blazon to be true, though, I'll be sworn, if he be so, his conceit is false.

Silence is the perfectest herald of joy: I were but little happy, if I could say how much.

Lady, as you are mine, I am yours: I give away myself for you and dote upon the exchange.

Speak, cousin, or, if you cannot, stop his mouth with a kiss, and let not him speak neither.

Yea, my lord, I thank it, poor fool, it keeps on the windy side of care.

My cousin tells him in his ear that he is in her heart.

Good Lord, for alliance! Thus goes every one to the world but I, and I am sunburnt, I may sit in a corner and cry heigh-ho for a husband! Lady Beatrice, I will get you one.

Hath your grace ne'er a brother like you? Your father got excellent husbands, if a maid could come by them.

Will you have me, lady? No, my lord, unless I might have another for working-days: your grace is too costly to wear every day.

But, I beseech your grace, pardon me: I was born to speak all mirth and no matter.

Your silence most offends me, and to be merry best becomes you, for, out of question, you were born in a merry hour.

No, sure, my lord, my mother cried, but then there was a star danced, and under that was I born.

Cousins, God give you joy! Niece, will you look to those things I told you of? I cry you mercy, uncle.

By your grace's pardon. By my troth, a pleasant-spirited lady.

O, by no means: she mocks all her wooers out of suit.

O Lord, my lord, if they were but a week married, they would talk themselves mad.

County Claudio, when mean you to go to church? To-morrow, my lord: time goes on crutches till love have all his rites.

Not till Monday, my dear son, which is hence a just seven-night, and a time too brief, too, to have all things answer my mind.

Come, you shake the head at so long a breathing: but, I warrant thee, Claudio, the time shall not go dully by us.

I will in the interim undertake one of Hercules' labours, which is, to bring Signior Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a mountain of affection the one with the other.

I would fain have it a match, and I doubt not but to fashion it, if you three will but minister such assistance as I shall give you direction.

My lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten nights' watchings.

And you too, gentle Hero? I will do any modest office, my lord, to help my cousin to a good husband.

And Benedick is not the unhopefullest husband that I know.

Thus far can I praise him, he is of a noble strain, of approved valour and confirmed honesty.

If we can do this, Cupid is no longer an archer: hi s glory shall be ours, for we are the only love-gods.

It is so, the Count Claudio shall marry the daughter of Leonato.

Any bar, any cross, any impediment will be medicinable to me: I am sick in displeasure to him, and whatsoever comes athwart his affection ranges evenly with mine.

How canst thou cross this marriage? Not honestly, my lord, but so covertly that no dishonesty shall appear in me.

I think I told your lordship a year since, how much I am in the favour of Margaret, the waiting gentlewoman to Hero.

I can, at any unseasonable instant of the night, appoint her to look out at her lady's chamber window.

What life is in that, to be the death of this marriage? The poison of that lies in you to temper.

What proof shall I make of that? Proof enough to misuse the prince, to vex Claudio, to undo Hero and kill Leonato.

Look you for any other issue? Only to despite them, I will endeavour any thing.

Grow this to what adverse issue it can, I will put it in practise.

Be cunning in the working this, and thy fee is a thousand ducats.

Be you constant in the accusation, and my cunning shall not shame me.

In my chamber-window lies a book: bring it hither to me in the orchard.

I know that, but I would have thee hence, and here again.

He was wont to speak plain and to the purpose, like an honest man and a soldier, and now is he turned orthography, his words are a very fantastical banquet, just so many strange dishes.

One woman is fair, yet I am well, another is wise, yet I am well, another virtuous, yet I am well, but till all graces be in one woman, one woman shall not come in my grace.

Ha! the prince and Monsieur Love! I will hide me in the arbour.

Come, shall we hear this music? Yea, my good lord.

How still the evening is, As hush'd on purpose to grace harmony! See you where Benedick hath hid himself? O, very well, my lord: the music ended, We'll fit the kid-fox with a pennyworth.

O, good my lord, tax not so bad a voice To slander music any more than once.

It is the witness still of excellency To put a strange face on his own perfection.

Because you talk of wooing, I will sing, Since many a wooer doth commence his suit To her he thinks not worthy, yet he wooes, Yet will he swear he loves.

Now, pray thee, come, Or, if thou wilt hold longer argument, Do it in notes.

Note this before my notes, There's not a note of mine that's worth the noting.

Why, these are very crotchets that he speaks, Note, notes, forsooth, and nothing.

Now, divine air! now is his soul ravished! Is it not strange that sheeps' guts should hale souls out of men's bodies? Well, a horn for my money, when all's done.

Sing no more ditties, sing no moe, Of dumps so dull and heavy, The fraud of men was ever so, Since summer first was leafy: Then sigh not so,  and c.

Ha, no, no, faith, thou singest well enough for a shift.

An he had been a dog that should have howled thus, they would have hanged him: and I pray God his bad voice bode no mischief.

What was it you told me of to-day, that your niece Beatrice was in love with Signior Benedick? O, ay: stalk on.

stalk on, the fowl sits. I did never think that lady would have loved any man.

No, nor I neither, but most wonderful that she should so dote on Signior Benedick, whom she hath in all outward behaviors seemed ever to abhor.

Is't possible? Sits the wind in that corner? By my troth, my lord, I cannot tell what to think of it but that she loves him with an enraged affection: it is past the infinite of thought.

O God, counterfeit! There was never counterfeit of passion came so near the life of passion as she discovers it.

Why, what effects of passion shows she? Bait the hook well, this fish will bite.

What effects, my lord? She will sit you, you heard my daughter tell you how.

How, how, pray you? You amaze me: I would have I thought her spirit had been invincible against all assaults of affection.

I would have sworn it had, my lord, especially against Benedick.

I should think this a gull, but that the white-bearded fellow speaks it: knavery cannot, sure, hide himself in such reverence.

Hath she made her affection known to Benedick? No, and swears she never will: that's her torment.

Now you talk of a sheet of paper, I remember a pretty jest your daughter told us of.

It were good that Benedick knew of it by some other, if she will not discover it.

To what end? He would make but a sport of it and torment the poor lady worse.

She's an excellent sweet lady, and, out of all suspicion, she is virtuous.

O, my lord, wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body, we have ten proofs to one that blood hath the victory.

I am sorry for her, as I have just cause, being her uncle and her guardian.

I would she had bestowed this dotage on me: I would have daffed all other respects and made her half myself.

I pray you, tell Benedick of it, and hear what a' will say.

She doth well: if she should make tender of her love, 'tis very possible he'll scorn it, for the man, as you know all, hath a contemptible spirit.

He doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit.

As Hector, I assure you: and in the managing of quarrels you may say he is wise, for either he avoids them with great discretion, or undertakes them with a most Christian-like fear.

If he do fear God, a' must necessarily keep peace: if he break the peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling.

And so will he do, for the man doth fear God, howsoever it seems not in him by some large jests he will make.

Well I am sorry for your niece. Shall we go seek Benedick, and tell him of her love? Never tell him, my lord: let her wear it out with good counsel.

Nay, that's impossible: she may wear her heart out first.

Well, we will hear further of it by your daughter: let it cool the while.

I love Benedick well, and I could wish he would modestly examine himself, to see how much he is unworthy so good a lady.

If he do not dote on her upon this, I will never trust my expectation.

Let there be the same net spread for her, and that must your daughter and her gentlewomen carry.

The sport will be, when they hold one an opinion of another's dotage, and no such matter: that's the scene that I would see, which will be merely a dumb-show.

Let us send her to call him in to dinner. conference was sadly borne.

They seem to pity the lady: it seems her affections have their full bent.

I hear how I am censured: they say I will bear myself proudly, if I perceive the love come from her, they say too that she will rather die than give any sign of affection.

I did never think to marry: I must not seem proud: happy are they that hear their detractions and can put them to mending.

Shall quips and sentences and these paper bullets of the brain awe a man from the career of his humour? No, the world must be peopled.

When I said I would die a bachelor, I did not think I should live till I were married.

Here comes Beatrice. By this day! she's a fair lady: I do spy some marks of love in Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner.

I took no more pains for those thanks than you take pains to thank me: if it had been painful, I would not have come.

You take pleasure then in the message? Yea, just so much as you may take upon a knife's point and choke a daw withal.

Ha! 'Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner,' there's a double meaning in that 'I took no more pains for those thanks than you took pains to thank me.

that's as much as to say, Any pains that I take for you is as easy as thanks.

If I do not take pity of her, I am a villain, if I do not love her, I am a Jew.

This is thy office, Bear thee well in it and leave us alone.

Now, Ursula, when Beatrice doth come, As we do trace this alley up and down, Our talk must only be of Benedick.

When I do name him, let it be thy part To praise him more than ever man did merit: My talk to thee must be how Benedick Is sick in love with Beatrice.

Of this matter Is little Cupid's crafty arrow made, That only wounds by hearsay.

Now begin, For look where Beatrice, like a lapwing, runs Close by the ground, to hear our conference.

Then go we near her, that her ear lose nothing Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it.

Approaching the bower No, truly, Ursula, she is too disdainful, I know her spirits are as coy and wild As haggerds of the rock.

But are you sure That Benedick loves Beatrice so entirely? So says the prince and my new-trothed lord.

Sure, I think so, And therefore certainly it were not good She knew his love, lest she make sport at it.

So turns she every man the wrong side out And never gives to truth and virtue that Which simpleness and merit purchaseth.

Therefore let Benedick, like cover'd fire, Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly: It were a better death than die with mocks, Which is as bad as die with tickling.

No, rather I will go to Benedick And counsel him to fight against his passion.

And, truly, I'll devise some honest slanders To stain my cousin with: one doth not know How much an ill word may empoison liking.

She cannot be so much without true judgment-- Having so swift and excellent a wit As she is prized to have--as to refuse So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick.

I pray you, be not angry with me, madam, Speaking my fancy: Signior Benedick, For shape, for bearing, argument and valour, Goes foremost in report through Italy.

When are you married, madam? Why, every day, to-morrow.

Come, go in: I'll show thee some attires, and have thy counsel Which is the best to furnish me to-morrow.

She's limed, I warrant you: we have caught her, madam.

If it proves so, then loving goes by haps: Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.

What fire is in mine ears? Can this be true? Stand I condemn'd for pride and scorn so much? Contempt, farewell! and maiden pride, adieu! No glory lives behind the back of such.

I do but stay till your marriage be consummate, and then go I toward Arragon.

I'll bring you thither, my lord, if you'll vouchsafe me.

Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your marriage as to show a child his new coat and forbid him to wear it.

Hang him, truant! there's no true drop of blood in him, to be truly touched with love: if he be sad, he wants money.

Hang it! You must hang it first, and draw it afterwards.

What! sigh for the toothache? Where is but a humour or a worm.

Well, every one can master a grief but he that has Yet say I, he is in love.

Unless he have a fancy to this foolery, as it appears he hath, he is no fool for fancy, as you would have it appear he is.

Indeed, he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.

Nay, a' rubs himself with civet: can you smell him out by that? That's as much as to say, the sweet youth's in love.

And when was he wont to wash his face? Yea, or to paint himself? for the which, I hear what they say of him.

Nay, but his jesting spirit, which is now crept into a lute-string and now governed by stops.

Indeed, that tells a heavy tale for him: conclude, conclude he is in love.

That would I know too: I warrant, one that knows him not.

Yes, and his ill conditions, and, in despite of all, dies for him.

Old signior, walk aside with me: I have studied eight or nine wise words to speak to you, which these hobby-horses must not hear.

Hero and Margaret have by this played their parts with Beatrice, and then the two bears will not bite one another when they meet.

My lord and brother, God save you! Good den, brother.

In private? If it please you: yet Count Claudio may hear, for what I would speak of concerns him.

If there be any impediment, I pray you discover it.

You may think I love you not: let that appear hereafter, and aim better at me by that I now will manifest.

For my brother, I think he holds you well, and in dearness of heart hath holp to effect your ensuing marriage,--surely suit ill spent and labour ill bestowed.

Why, what's the matter? I came hither to tell you, and, circumstances shortened, for she has been too long a talking of, the lady is disloyal.

Who, Hero? Even she, Leonato's Hero, your Hero, every man's Hero: The word is too good to paint out her wickedness, I could say she were worse: think you of a worse title, and I will fit her to it.

If you dare not trust that you see, confess not that you know: if you will follow me, I will show you enough, and when you have seen more and heard more, proceed accordingly.

If I see any thing to-night why I should not marry her to-morrow in the congregation, where I should wed, there will I shame her.

And, as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join with thee to disgrace her.

I will disparage her no farther till you are my witnesses: bear it coldly but till midnight, and let the issue show itself.

O day untowardly turned! O mischief strangely thwarting! O plague right well prevented! so will you say when you have seen the sequel.

Are you good men and true? Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation, body and soul.

Nay, that were a punishment too good for them, if they should have any allegiance in them, being chosen for the prince's watch.

First, who think you the most desertless man to be Hugh Otecake, sir, or George Seacole, for they can write and read.

God hath blessed you with a good name: to be a well-favoured man is the gift of fortune, but to write and read comes by nature.

Both which, master constable,-- You have: I knew it would be your answer.

Well, for your favour, sir, why, give God thanks, and make no boast of it, and for your writing and reading, let that appear when there is no need of such vanity.

You are thought here to be the most senseless and fit man for the constable of the watch, therefore bear you the lantern.

This is your charge: you shall comprehend all vagrom men, you are to bid any man stand, in the prince's name.

How if a' will not stand? Why, then, take no note of him, but let him go, and presently call the rest of the watch together and thank God you are rid of a knave.

If he will not stand when he is bidden, he is none of the prince's subjects.

True, and they are to meddle with none but the prince's subjects.

You shall also make no noise in the streets, for, for the watch to babble and to talk is most tolerable and not to be endured.

We will rather sleep than talk: we know what belongs to a watch.

Why, you speak like an ancient and most quiet watchman, for I cannot see how sleeping should offend: only, have a care that your bills be not stolen.

Well, you are to call at all the ale-houses, and bid those that are drunk get them to bed.

How if they will not? Why, then, let them alone till they are sober: if they make you not then the better answer, you may say they are not the men you took them for.

If you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by virtue of your office, to be no true man, and, for such kind of men, the less you meddle or make with them, why the more is for your honesty.

You have been always called a merciful man, partner.

Truly, I would not hang a dog by my will, much more a man who hath any honesty in him.

If you hear a child cry in the night, you must call to the nurse and bid her still it.

This is the end of the charge:--you, constable, are to present the prince's own person: if you meet the prince in the night, you may stay him.

Ha, ha, ha! Well, masters, good night: an there be any matter of weight chances, call up me: keep your fellows' counsels and your own, and good night.

Well, masters, we hear our charge: let us go sit here upon the church-bench till two, and then all to bed.

I pray you watch about Signior Leonato's door, for the wedding being there to-morrow, there is a great coil to-night.

What Conrade! Conrade, I say! Here, man, I am at thy elbow.

Mass, and my elbow itched, I thought there would a scab follow.

I will owe thee an answer for that: and now forward with thy tale.

Stand thee close, then, under this pent-house, for it drizzles rain, and I will, like a true drunkard, utter all to thee.

Therefore know I have earned of Don John a thousand ducats.

Thou knowest that the fashion of a doublet, or a hat, or a cloak, is nothing to a man.

But seest thou not what a deformed thief this fashion thief this seven year, a' goes up and down like a gentleman: I remember his name.

Didst thou not hear somebody? No, 'twas the vane on the house.

We charge you, in the prince's name, stand! Call up the right master constable.

We have here recovered the most dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known in the commonwealth.

And one Deformed is one of them: I know him, a' wears a lock.

Masters, masters,-- You'll be made bring Deformed forth, I warrant you.

Never speak: we charge you let us obey you to go with us.

We are like to prove a goodly commodity, being taken up of these men's bills.

Come, we'll obey you. Good Ursula, wake my cousin Beatrice, and desire her to rise.

By my troth, 's not so good, and I warrant your cousin will say so.

My cousin's a fool, and thou art another: I'll wear none but this.

I like the new tire within excellently, if the hair were a thought browner, and your gown's a most rare fashion, i' faith.

I saw the Duchess of Milan's gown that they praise so.

God give me joy to wear it! for my heart is exceeding heavy.

Why how now? do you speak in the sick tune? I am out of all other tune, methinks.

Clap's into 'Light o' love,' that goes without a burden: do you sing it, and I'll dance it.

Ye light o' love, with your heels! then, if your husband have stables enough, you'll see he shall lack no barns.

O illegitimate construction! I scorn that with my heels.

'Tis almost five o'clock, cousin, tis time you were ready.

By my troth, I am exceeding ill: heigh-ho! For a hawk, a horse, or a husband? For the letter that begins them all, H.

Well, and you be not turned Turk, there's no more sailing by the star.

What means the fool, trow? Nothing I, but God send every one their heart's desire! These gloves the count sent me, they are an excellent perfume.

A maid, and stuffed! there's goodly catching of cold.

O, God help me! God help me! how long have you professed apprehension? Even since you left it.

Doth not my wit become me rarely? It is not seen enough, you should wear it in your cap.

By my troth, I am sick. Get you some of this distilled Carduus Benedictus, and lay it to your heart: it is the only thing for a qualm.

Benedictus! why Benedictus? you have some moral in this Benedictus.

Moral! no, by my troth, I have no moral meaning, I meant, plain holy-thistle.

What pace is this that thy tongue keeps? Not a false gallop.

Re-enter URSULA Madam, withdraw: the prince, the count, Signior Benedick, Don John, and all the gallants of the town, are come to fetch you to church.

Help to dress me, good coz, good Meg, good Ursula.

What would you with me, honest neighbour? Marry, sir, I would have some confidence with you that decerns you nearly.

Brief, I pray you, for you see it is a busy time with me.

Yes, I thank God I am as honest as any man living that is an old man and no honester than I.

Comparisons are odorous: palabras, neighbour Verges.

It pleases your worship to say so, but we are the poor duke's officers, but truly, for mine own part, if I were as tedious as a king, I could find it in my heart to bestow it all of your worship.

Marry, sir, our watch to-night, excepting your worship's presence, ha' ta'en a couple of as arrant knaves as any in Messina.

A good old man, sir, he will be talking: as they say, when the age is in, the wit is out: God help us! it is a world to see.

Well said, i' faith, neighbour Verges: well, God's a good man, an two men ride of a horse, one must ride behind.

An honest soul, i' faith, sir, by my troth he is, as ever broke bread, but God is to be worshipped, all men are not alike, alas, good neighbour! Indeed, neighbour, he comes too short of you.

One word, sir: our watch, sir, have indeed comprehended two aspicious persons, and we would have them this morning examined before your worship.

Take their examination yourself and bring it me: I am now in great haste, as it may appear unto you.

My lord, they stay for you to give your daughter to her husband.

Go, good partner, go, get you to Francis Seacole, bid him bring his pen and inkhorn to the gaol: we are now to examination these men.

We will spare for no wit, I warrant you, here's that shall drive some of them to a non-come: only get the learned writer to set down our excommunication and meet me at the gaol.

Come, Friar Francis, be brief, only to the plain form of marriage, and you shall recount their particular duties afterwards.

To be married to her: friar, you come to marry her.

Lady, you come hither to be married to this count.

If either of you know any inward impediment why you should not be conjoined, charge you, on your souls, to utter it.

Know you any, count? I dare make his answer, none.

O, what men dare do! what men may do! what men daily do, not knowing what they do! How now! interjections? Why, then, some be of laughing, as, ah, ha, he! Stand thee by, friar.

Father, by your leave: Will you with free and unconstrained soul Give me this maid, your daughter? As freely, son, as God did give her me.

And what have I to give you back, whose worth May counterpoise this rich and precious gift? Nothing, unless you render her again.

There, Leonato, take her back again: Give not this rotten orange to your friend, She's but the sign and semblance of her honour.

What do you mean, my lord? Not to be married, Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton.

Is my lord well, that he doth speak so wide? Sweet prince, why speak not you? What should I speak? I stand dishonour'd, that have gone about To link my dear friend to a common stale.

Are these things spoken, or do I but dream? Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.

O, God defend me! how am I beset! What kind of catechising call you this? To make you answer truly to your name.

Is it not Hero? Who can blot that name With any just reproach? Marry, that can Hero, Hero itself can blot out Hero's virtue.

What man was he talk'd with you yesternight Out at your window betwixt twelve and one? Now, if you are a maid, answer to this.

Fie, fie! they are not to be named, my lord, Not to be spoke of, There is not chastity enough in language Without offence to utter them.

Thus, pretty lady, I am sorry for thy much misgovernment.

Hath no man's dagger here a point for me? HERO swoons Why, how now, cousin! wherefore sink you down? Come, let us go.

These things, come thus to light, Smother her spirits up.

Help, uncle! Hero! why, Hero! Uncle! Signior Benedick! Friar! O Fate! take not away thy heavy hand.

Death is the fairest cover for her shame That may be wish'd for.

For my part, I am so attired in wonder, I know not what to say.

O, on my soul, my cousin is belied! Lady, were you her bedfellow last night? No, truly not, although, until last night, I have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow.

Hear me a little, For I have only been silent so long And given way unto this course of fortune.

Two of them have the very bent of honour, And if their wisdoms be misled in this, The practise of it lives in John the bastard, Whose spirits toil in frame of villanies.

If they speak but truth of her, These hands shall tear her, if they wrong her honour, The proudest of them shall well hear of it.

Pause awhile, And let my counsel sway you in this case.

Let this be so, and doubt not but success Will fashion the event in better shape Than I can lay it down in likelihood.

Being that I flow in grief, The smallest twine may lead me.

'Tis well consented: presently away, For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure.

Come, lady, die to live: this wedding-day Perhaps is but prolong'd: have patience and endure.

Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while? Yea, and I will weep a while longer.

Ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would right her! Is there any way to show such friendship? A very even way, but no such friend.

May a man do it? It is a man's office, but not yours.

I do love nothing in the world so well as you: is not that strange? As strange as the thing I know not.

It were as possible for me to say I loved nothing so well as you: but believe me not, and yet I lie not, I confess nothing, nor I deny nothing.

I am sorry for my cousin. By my sword, Beatrice, thou lovest me.

I will swear by it that you love me, and I will make him eat it that says I love not you.

Will you not eat your word? With no sauce that can be devised to it.

Why, then, God forgive me! What offence, sweet Beatrice? You have stayed me in a happy hour: I was about to protest I loved you.

I love you with so much of my heart that none is left to protest.

I am gone, though I am here: there is no love in you: nay, I pray you, let me go.

You dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine enemy.

Hear me, Beatrice,-- Talk with a man out at a window! A proper saying! Nay, but, Beatrice,-- Sweet Hero! She is wronged, she is slandered, she is undone.

I cannot be a man with wishing, therefore I will die a woman with grieving.

By this hand, I love thee. Use it for my love some other way than swearing by it.

Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath wronged Hero? Yea, as sure as I have a thought or a soul.

By this hand, Claudio shall render me a dear account.

Go, comfort your cousin: I must say she is dead: and so, farewell.

Is our whole dissembly appeared? O, a stool and a cushion for the sexton.

Which be the malefactors? Marry, that am I and my partner.

Nay, that's certain, we have the exhibition to examine.

But which are the offenders that are to be examined? let them come before master constable.

What is your name, friend? Pray, write down, Borachio.

Yours, sirrah? I am a gentleman, sir, and my name is Conrade.

How answer you for yourselves? Marry, sir, we say we are none.

A marvellous witty fellow, I assure you: but I will go about with him.

Come you hither, sirrah, a word in your ear: sir, I say to you, it is thought you are false knaves.

Have you writ down, that they are none? Master constable, you go not the way to examine: you must call forth the watch that are their accusers.

Masters, I charge you, in the prince's name, accuse these men.

This man said, sir, that Don John, the prince's brother, was a villain.

Why, this is flat perjury, to call a prince's brother villain.

Master constable,-- Pray thee, fellow, peace: I do not like thy look, I promise thee.

What heard you him say else? Marry, that he had received a thousand ducats of Don John for accusing the Lady Hero wrongfully.

What else, fellow? And that Count Claudio did mean, upon his words, to disgrace Hero before the whole assembly.

and not marry her. O villain! thou wilt be condemned into everlasting redemption for this.

Prince John is this morning secretly stolen away, Hero was in this manner accused, in this very manner refused, and upon the grief of this suddenly died.

Master constable, let these men be bound, and brought to Leonato's: I will go before and show him their examination.

Let them be in the hands-- Off, coxcomb! God's my life, where's the sexton? let him write down the prince's officer coxcomb.

Come, bind them. Thou naughty varlet! Away! you are an ass, you are an ass.

No, thou villain, thou art full of piety, as shall be proved upon thee by good witness.

Bring him away. O that I had been writ down an ass! If you go on thus, you will kill yourself: And 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief Against yourself.

I pray thee, cease thy counsel, Which falls into mine ears as profitless As water in a sieve: give not me counsel, Nor let no comforter delight mine ear But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine.

Therefore give me no counsel: My griefs cry louder than advertisement.

I will be flesh and blood, For there was never yet philosopher That could endure the toothache patiently, However they have writ the style of gods And made a push at chance and sufferance.

Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself, Make those that do offend you suffer too.

My soul doth tell me Hero is belied, And that shall Claudio know, so shall the prince And all of them that thus dishonour her.

Some haste, my lord! well, fare you well, my lord: Are you so hasty now? well, all is one.

If he could right himself with quarreling, Some of us would lie low.

Who wrongs him? Marry, thou dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou:-- Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword, I fear thee not.

Marry, beshrew my hand, If it should give your age such cause of fear: In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.

Tush, tush, man, never fleer and jest at me: I speak not like a dotard nor a fool, As under privilege of age to brag What I have done being young, or what would do Were I not old.

Know, Claudio, to thy head, Thou hast so wrong'd mine innocent child and me That I am forced to lay my reverence by And, with grey hairs and bruise of many days, Do challenge thee to trial of a man.

My lord, my lord, I'll prove it on his body, if he dare, Despite his nice fence and his active practise, His May of youth and bloom of lustihood.

Canst thou so daff me? Thou hast kill'd my child: If thou kill'st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.

He shall kill two of us, and men indeed: But that's no matter, let him kill one first, Win me and wear me, let him answer me.

Come, follow me, boy, come, sir boy, come, follow me: Sir boy, I'll whip you from your foining fence, Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.

But, brother Antony,-- Come, 'tis no matter: Do not you meddle, let me deal in this.

My heart is sorry for your daughter's death: But, on my honour, she was charged with nothing But what was true and very full of proof.

Welcome, signior: you are almost come to part almost a fray.

We had like to have had our two noses snapped off with two old men without teeth.

What thinkest thou? Had we fought, I doubt we should have been too young for them.

We have been up and down to seek thee, for we are high-proof melancholy and would fain have it beaten away.

Wilt thou use thy wit? It is in my scabbard: shall I draw it? Dost thou wear thy wit by thy side? Never any did so, though very many have been beside their wit.

I will bid thee draw, as we do the minstrels, draw, to pleasure us.

Art thou sick, or angry? What, courage, man! What though care killed a cat, thou hast mettle enough in thee to kill care.

Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career, and you charge it against me.

I pray you choose another subject. Nay, then, give him another staff: this last was broke cross.

By this light, he changes more and more: I think he be angry indeed.

Shall I speak a word in your ear? God bless me from a challenge! I will make it good how you dare, with what you dare, and when you dare.

You have killed a sweet lady, and her death shall fall heavy on you.

What, a feast, a feast? I' faith, I thank him, he hath bid me to a calf's head and a capon, the which if I do not carve most curiously, say my knife's naught.

Shall I not find a woodcock too? Sir, your wit ambles well, it goes easily.

I'll tell thee how Beatrice praised thy wit the other day.

I said, thou hadst a fine wit: 'True,' said she, 'a fine little one.

'No,' said I, 'a great wit:' 'Right,' says she, 'a great gross one.

'Nay,' said I, 'a good wit:' 'Just,' said she, 'it hurts nobody.

'Nay,' said I, 'the gentleman is wise:' 'Certain,' said she, 'a wise gentleman.

'Nay,' said I, 'he hath the tongues:' 'That I believe,' said she, 'for he swore a thing to me on Monday night, which he forswore on Tuesday morning, there's a double tongue, there's two tongues.

Thus did she, an hour together, transshape thy particular virtues: yet at last she concluded with a sigh, thou wast the properest man in Italy.

For the which she wept heartily and said she cared Yea, that she did: but yet, for all that, an if she did not hate him deadly, she would love him dearly: the old man's daughter told us all.

All, all, and, moreover, God saw him when he was hid in the garden.

But when shall we set the savage bull's horns on the sensible Benedick's head? Yea, and text underneath, 'Here dwells Benedick the married man'? Fare you well, boy: you know my mind.

I will leave you now to your gossip-like humour: you break jests as braggarts do their blades, which God be thanked, hurt not.

My lord, for your many courtesies I thank you: I must discontinue your company: your brother the bastard is fled from Messina: you have among you killed a sweet and innocent lady.

For my Lord Lackbeard there, he and I shall meet: and, till then, peace be with him.

In most profound earnest, and, I'll warrant you, for the love of Beatrice.

What a pretty thing man is when he goes in his doublet and hose and leaves off his wit! He is then a giant to an ape, but then is an ape a doctor to such a man.

But, soft you, let me be: pluck up, my heart, and be sad.

Did he not say, my brother was fled? Come you, sir: if justice cannot tame you, she shall ne'er weigh more reasons in her balance: nay, an you be a cursing hypocrite once, you must be looked to.

How now? two of my brother's men bound! Borachio Hearken after their offence, my lord.

First, I ask thee what they have done, thirdly, I ask thee what's their offence, sixth and lastly, why they are committed, and, to conclude, what you lay to their charge.

Rightly reasoned, and in his own division: and, by my troth, there's one meaning well suited.

The lady is dead upon mine and my master's false accusation, and, briefly, I desire nothing but the reward of a villain.

Runs not this speech like iron through your blood? I have drunk poison whiles he utter'd it.

But did my brother set thee on to this? Yea, and paid me richly for the practise of it.

He is composed and framed of treachery: And fled he is upon this villany.

Sweet Hero! now thy image doth appear In the rare semblance that I loved it first.

Come, bring away the plaintiffs: by this time our sexton hath reformed Signior Leonato of the matter: and, masters, do not forget to specify, when time and place shall serve, that I am an ass.

Here, here comes master Signior Leonato, and the Sexton too.

Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast kill'd Mine innocent child? Yea, even I alone.

No, not so, villain, thou beliest thyself: Here stand a pair of honourable men, A third is fled, that had a hand in it.

I thank you, princes, for my daughter's death: Record it with your high and worthy deeds: 'Twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it.

I know not how to pray your patience, Yet I must speak.

Choose your revenge yourself, Impose me to what penance your invention Can lay upon my sin: yet sinn'd I not But in mistaking.

By my soul, nor I: And yet, to satisfy this good old man, I would bend under any heavy weight That he'll enjoin me to.

O noble sir, Your over-kindness doth wring tears from me! I do embrace your offer, and dispose For henceforth of poor Claudio.

To-morrow then I will expect your coming, To-night I take my leave.

This naughty man Shall face to face be brought to Margaret, Who I believe was pack'd in all this wrong, Hired to it by your brother.

No, by my soul, she was not, Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me, But always hath been just and virtuous In any thing that I do know by her.

Moreover, sir, which indeed is not under white and black, this plaintiff here, the offender, did call me ass: I beseech you, let it be remembered in his punishment.

Your worship speaks like a most thankful and reverend youth, and I praise God for you.

God save the foundation! Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.

I leave an arrant knave with your worship, which I beseech your worship to correct yourself, for the example of others.

God keep your worship! I wish your worship well, God restore you to health! I humbly give you leave to depart, and if a merry meeting may be wished, God prohibit it! Come, neighbour.

talk with Margaret, How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.

Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve well at my hands by helping me to the speech of Beatrice.

Will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty? In so high a style, Margaret, that no man living shall come over it, for, in most comely truth, thou deservest it.

To have no man come over me! why, shall I always keep below stairs? Thy wit is as quick as the greyhound's mouth, it catches.

And yours as blunt as the fencer's foils, which hit, but hurt not.

A most manly wit, Margaret, it will not hurt a woman: and so, I pray thee, call Beatrice: I give thee the bucklers.

If you use them, Margaret, you must put in the pikes with a vice, and they are dangerous weapons for maids.

Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I think hath legs.

Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I called thee? Yea, signior, and depart when you bid me.

O, stay but till then! 'Then' is spoken, fare you well now: and yet, ere I go, let me go with that I came, which is, with knowing what hath passed between you and Claudio.

Foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but foul breath, and foul breath is noisome, therefore I will depart unkissed.

Thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense, so forcible is thy wit.

But I must tell thee plainly, Claudio undergoes my challenge, and either I must shortly hear from him, or I will subscribe him a coward.

But for which of my good parts did you first suffer love for me? Suffer love! a good epithet! I do suffer love indeed, for I love thee against my will.

In spite of your heart, I think, alas, poor heart! If you spite it for my sake, I will spite it for yours, for I will never love that which my friend hates.

It appears not in this confession: there's not one wise man among twenty that will praise himself.

An old, an old instance, Beatrice, that lived in the lime of good neighbours.

If a man do not erect in this age his own tomb ere he dies, he shall live no longer in monument than the bell rings and the widow weeps.

So much for praising myself, who, I myself will bear witness, is praiseworthy: and now tell me, how doth your cousin? Very ill.

There will I leave you too, for here comes one in haste.

Yonder's old coil at home: it is proved my Lady Hero hath been falsely accused, the prince and Claudio mightily abused, and Don John is the author of all, who is fed and gone.

Will you come presently? Will you go hear this news, signior? I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be buried in thy eyes, and moreover I will go with thee to thy uncle's.

Done to death by slanderous tongues Was the Hero that here lies: Death, in guerdon of her wrongs, Gives her fame which never dies.

So the life that died with shame Lives in death with glorious fame.

Hang thou there upon the tomb, Praising her when I am dumb.

Pardon, goddess of the night, Those that slew thy virgin knight, For the which, with songs of woe, Round about her tomb they go.

Midnight, assist our moan, Help us to sigh and groan, Heavily, heavily: Graves, yawn and yield your dead, Till death be uttered, Heavily, heavily.

Now, unto thy bones good night! Yearly will I do this rite.

Good morrow, masters, put your torches out: The wolves have prey'd, and look, the gentle day, Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey.

Come, let us hence, and put on other weeds, And then to Leonato's we will go.

And Hymen now with luckier issue speed's Than this for whom we render'd up this woe.

And so am I, being else by faith enforced To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.

Well, daughter, and you gentle-women all, Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves, And when I send for you, come hither mask'd.

The prince and Claudio promised by this hour To visit me.

You know your office, brother: You must be father to your brother's daughter And give her to young Claudio.

To do what, signior? To bind me, or undo me, one of them.

Signior Leonato, truth it is, good signior, Your niece regards me with an eye of favour.

Good morrow, prince, good morrow, Claudio: We here attend you.

Are you yet determined To-day to marry with my brother's daughter? I'll hold my mind, were she an Ethiope.

Why, what's the matter, That you have such a February face, So full of frost, of storm and cloudiness? I think he thinks upon the savage bull.

Tush, fear not, man, we'll tip thy horns with gold And all Europa shall rejoice at thee, As once Europa did at lusty Jove, When he would play the noble beast in love.

Bull Jove, sir, had an amiable low, And some such strange bull leap'd your father's cow, And got a calf in that same noble feat Much like to you, for you have just his bleat.

Re-enter ANTONIO, with the Ladies masked Which is the lady I must seize upon? This same is she, and I do give you her.

Sweet, let me see your face. No, that you shall not, till you take her hand Before this friar and swear to marry her.

Give me your hand: before this holy friar, I am your husband, if you like of me.

And when I lived, I was your other wife: And when you loved, you were my other husband.

Another Hero! Nothing certainer: One Hero died defiled, but I do live, And surely as I live, I am a maid.

The former Hero! Hero that is dead! She died, my lord, but whiles her slander lived.

All this amazement can I qualify: When after that the holy rites are ended, I'll tell you largely of fair Hero's death: Meantime let wonder seem familiar, And to the chapel let us presently.

Which is Beatrice? Do not you love me? Why, no, no more than reason.

Why, then your uncle and the prince and Claudio Have been deceived, they swore you did.

Do not you love me? Troth, no, no more than reason.

Why, then my cousin Margaret and Ursula Are much deceived, for they did swear you did.

Then you do not love me? No, truly, but in friendly recompense.

And I'll be sworn upon't that he loves her, For here's a paper written in his hand, A halting sonnet of his own pure brain, Fashion'd to Beatrice.

And here's another Writ in my cousin's hand, stolen from her pocket, Containing her affection unto Benedick.

A miracle! here's our own hands against our hearts.

Come, I will have thee, but, by this light, I take thee for pity.

I would not deny you, but, by this good day, I yield upon great persuasion, and partly to save your life, for I was told you were in a consumption.

Kissing her How dost thou, Benedick, the married man? I'll tell thee what, prince, a college of wit-crackers cannot flout me out of my humour.

Dost thou think I  care for a satire or an epigram? No: if a man will be beaten with brains, a' shall wear nothing handsome about him.

For thy part, Claudio, I did think to have beaten thee, but in that thou art like to be my kinsman, live unbruised and love my cousin.

Come, come, we are friends: let's have a dance ere we are married, that we may lighten our own hearts and our wives' heels.

Prince, thou art sad, get thee a wife, get thee a wife: there is no staff more reverend than one tipped with horn.

My lord, your brother John is ta'en in flight, And brought with armed men back to Messina.

Think not on him till to-morrow: I'll devise thee brave punishments for him.

Tush! never tell me, I take it much unkindly That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.

'Sblood, but you will not hear me: If ever I did dream of such a matter, Abhor me.

Why, there's no remedy, 'tis the curse of service, Preferment goes by letter and affection, And not by old gradation, where each second Stood heir to the first.

Now, sir, be judge yourself, Whether I in any just term am affined To love the Moor.

O, sir, content you, I follow him to serve my turn upon him: We cannot all be masters, nor all masters Cannot be truly follow'd.

Do, with like timorous accent and dire yell As when, by night and negligence, the fire Is spied in populous cities.

Arise, arise, Awake the snorting citizens with the bell, Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you: Arise, I say.

What, have you lost your wits? Most reverend signior, do you know my voice? Not I	what are you? My name is Roderigo.

Sir, sir, sir,-- But thou must needs be sure My spirit and my place have in them power To make this bitter to thee.

What tell'st thou me of robbing? this is Venice, My house is not a grange.

Most grave Brabantio, In simple and pure soul I come to you.

'Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve God, if the devil bid you.

What profane wretch art thou? I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter and the Moor are now making the beast with two backs.

Straight satisfy yourself: If she be in her chamber or your house, Let loose on me the justice of the state For thus deluding you.

Strike on the tinder, ho! Give me a taper! call up all my people! This accident is not unlike my dream: Belief of it oppresses me already.

Yet, for necessity of present life, I must show out a flag and sign of love, Which is indeed but sign.

That you shall surely find him, Lead to the Sagittary the raised search, And there will I be with him.

So, farewell. It is too true an evil: gone she is, And what's to come of my despised time Is nought but bitterness.

Are they married, think you? Truly, I think they are.

O heaven! How got she out? O treason of the blood! Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds By what you see them act.

Is there not charms By which the property of youth and maidhood May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo, Of some such thing? Yes, sir, I have indeed.

O, would you had had her! Some one way, some another.

Do you know Where we may apprehend her and the Moor? I think I can discover him, if you please, To get good guard and go along with me.

Get weapons, ho! And raise some special officers of night.

Nay, but he prated, And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms Against your honour That, with the little godliness I have, I did full hard forbear him.

Let him do his spite: My services which I have done the signiory Shall out-tongue his complaints.

But, look! what lights come yond? Those are the raised father and his friends: You were best go in.

Not I	I must be found: My parts, my title and my perfect soul Shall manifest me rightly.

The goodness of the night upon you, friends! What is the news? The duke does greet you, general, And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance, Even on the instant.

I will but spend a word here in the house, And go with you.

Ancient, what makes he here? 'Faith, he to-night hath boarded a land carack: If it prove lawful prize, he's made for ever.

To who? Re-enter OTHELLO Marry, to--Come, captain, will you go? Have with you.

Down with him, thief! They draw on both sides You, Roderigo! come, sir, I am for you.

Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.

Good signior, you shall more command with years Than with your weapons.

I therefore apprehend and do attach thee For an abuser of the world, a practiser Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.

Lay hold upon him: if he do resist, Subdue him at his peril.

Hold your hands, Both you of my inclining, and the rest: Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it Without a prompter.

Where will you that I go To answer this your charge? To prison, till fit time Of law and course of direct session Call thee to answer.

The DUKE and Senators sitting at a table, Officers attending There is no composition in these news That gives them credit.

Indeed, they are disproportion'd, My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.

Nay, it is possible enough to judgment: I do not so secure me in the error, But the main article I do approve In fearful sense.

Now, what's the business? The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes, So was I bid report here to the state By Signior Angelo.

How say you by this change? This cannot be, By no assay of reason: 'tis a pageant, To keep us in false gaze.

The Ottomites, reverend and gracious, Steering with due course towards the isle of Rhodes, Have there injointed them with an after fleet.

How many, as you guess? Of thirty sail: and now they do restem Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance Their purposes toward Cyprus.

Signior Montano, Your trusty and most valiant servitor, With his free duty recommends you thus, And prays you to believe him.

Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town? He's now in Florence.

Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you Against the general enemy Ottoman.

To BRABANTIO I did not see you, welcome, gentle signior, We lack'd your counsel and your help tonight.

Here is the man, this Moor, whom now, it seems, Your special mandate for the state-affairs Hath hither brought.

I therefore vouch again That with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood, Or with some dram conjured to this effect, He wrought upon her.

To vouch this, is no proof, Without more wider and more overt test Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods Of modern seeming do prefer against him.

And, till she come, as truly as to heaven I do confess the vices of my blood, So justly to your grave ears I'll present How I did thrive in this fair lady's love, And she in mine.

Her father loved me, oft invited me, Still question'd me the story of my life, From year to year, the battles, sieges, fortunes, That I have passed.

Upon this hint I spake: She loved me for the dangers I had pass'd, And I loved her that she did pity them.

This only is the witchcraft I have used: Here comes the lady, let her witness it.

Good Brabantio, Take up this mangled matter at the best: Men do their broken weapons rather use Than their bare hands.

Please it your grace, on to the state-affairs: I had rather to adopt a child than get it.

Come hither, Moor: I here do give thee that with all my heart Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart I would keep from thee.

For your sake, jewel, I am glad at soul I have no other child: For thy escape would teach me tyranny, To hang clogs on them.

I have done, my lord. Let me speak like yourself, and lay a sentence, Which, as a grise or step, may help these lovers Into your favour.

When remedies are past, the griefs are ended By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.

To mourn a mischief that is past and gone Is the next way to draw new mischief on.

What cannot be preserved when fortune takes Patience her injury a mockery makes.

The robb'd that smiles steals something from the thief, He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.

So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile, We lose it not, so long as we can smile.

He bears the sentence well that nothing bears But the free comfort which from thence he hears, But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow.

These sentences, to sugar, or to gall, Being strong on both sides, are equivocal: But words are words, I never yet did hear That the bruised heart was pierced through the ear.

I humbly beseech you, proceed to the affairs of state.

The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for Cyprus.

Most humbly therefore bending to your state, I crave fit disposition for my wife.

Due reference of place and exhibition, With such accommodation and besort As levels with her breeding.

Nor I, I would not there reside, To put my father in impatient thoughts By being in his eye.

Most gracious duke, To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear, And let me find a charter in your voice, To assist my simpleness.

So that, dear lords, if I be left behind, A moth of peace, and he go to the war, The rites for which I love him are bereft me, And I a heavy interim shall support By his dear absence.

Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not, To please the palate of my appetite, Nor to comply with heat--the young affects In me defunct--and proper satisfaction.

Othello, leave some officer behind, And he shall our commission bring to you, With such things else of quality and respect As doth import you.

So please your grace, my ancient, A man he is of honest and trust: To his conveyance I assign my wife, With what else needful your good grace shall think To be sent after me.

To BRABANTIO And, noble signior, If virtue no delighted beauty lack, Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.

Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see: She has deceived her father, and may thee.

My life upon her faith! Honest Iago, My Desdemona must I leave to thee: I prithee, let thy wife attend on her: And bring them after in the best advantage.

Come, Desdemona: I have but an hour Of love, of worldly matters and direction, To spend with thee: we must obey the time.

What say'st thou, noble heart? What will I do, thinkest thou? Why, go to bed, and sleep.

Why, thou silly gentleman! It is silliness to live when to live is torment, and then have we a prescription to die when death is our physician.

O villainous! I have looked upon the world for four times seven years, and since I could distinguish betwixt a benefit and an injury, I never found man that knew how to love himself.

Ere I would say, I would drown myself for the love of a guinea-hen, I would change my humanity with a baboon.

What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be so fond, but it is not in my virtue to amend it.

Virtue! a fig! 'tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus.

It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the will.

Come, be a man. Drown thyself! drown cats and blind puppies.

I have professed me thy friend and I confess me knit to thy deserving with cables of perdurable toughness, I could never better stead thee than now.

Put money in thy purse, follow thou the wars, defeat thy favour with an usurped beard, I say, put money in thy purse.

These Moors are changeable in their wills: fill thy purse with money:--the food that to him now is as luscious as locusts, shall be to him shortly as bitter as coloquintida.

She must change for youth: when she is sated with his body, she will find the error of her choice: she must have change, she must: therefore put money in thy purse.

If thou wilt needs damn thyself, do it a more delicate way than drowning.

A pox of drowning thyself! it is clean out of the way: seek thou rather to be hanged in compassing thy joy than to be drowned and go without her.

Let us be conjunctive in our revenge against him: if thou canst cuckold him, thou dost thyself a pleasure, me a sport.

There are many events in the womb of time which will be delivered.

Adieu. Where shall we meet i' the morning? At my lodging.

Do you hear, Roderigo? What say you? No more of drowning, do you hear? I am changed: I'll go sell all my land.

Thus do I ever make my fool my purse: For I mine own gain'd knowledge should profane, If I would time expend with such a snipe.

I hate the Moor: And it is thought abroad, that 'twixt my sheets He has done my office: I know not if't be true, But I, for mere suspicion in that kind, Will do as if for surety.

He holds me well, The better shall my purpose work on him.

Cassio's a proper man: let me see now: To get his place and to plume up my will In double knavery--How, how? Let's see:-- After some time, to abuse Othello's ear That he is too familiar with his wife.

He hath a person and a smooth dispose To be suspected, framed to make women false.

The Moor is of a free and open nature, That thinks men honest that but seem to be so, And will as tenderly be led by the nose As asses are.

It is engender'd. Hell and night Must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light.

What from the cape can you discern at sea? Nothing at all: it is a highwrought flood, I cannot, 'twixt the heaven and the main, Descry a sail.

If that the Turkish fleet Be not enshelter'd and embay'd, they are drown'd: It is impossible they bear it out.

The desperate tempest hath so bang'd the Turks, That their designment halts: a noble ship of Venice Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance On most part of their fleet.

How! is this true? The ship is here put in, A Veronesa, Michael Cassio, Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello, Is come on shore: the Moor himself at sea, And is in full commission here for Cyprus.

But this same Cassio, though he speak of comfort Touching the Turkish loss, yet he looks sadly, And prays the Moor be safe, for they were parted With foul and violent tempest.

Pray heavens he be, For I have served him, and the man commands Like a full soldier.

Let's to the seaside, ho! As well to see the vessel that's come in As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello, Even till we make the main and the aerial blue An indistinct regard.

Come, let's do so: For every minute is expectancy Of more arrivance.

Thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle, That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens Give him defence against the elements, For I have lost us him on a dangerous sea.

Is he well shipp'd? His bark is stoutly timber'd, his pilot Of very expert and approved allowance, Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death, Stand in bold cure.

A cry within 'A sail, a sail, a sail!' What noise? The town is empty, on the brow o' the sea Stand ranks of people, and they cry 'A sail!' My hopes do shape him for the governor.

Guns heard They do discharge their shot of courtesy: Our friends at least.

I pray you, sir, go forth, And give us truth who 'tis that is arrived.

Re-enter second Gentleman How now! who has put in? 'Tis one Iago, ancient to the general.

What is she? She that I spake of, our great captain's captain, Left in the conduct of the bold Iago, Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts A se'nnight's speed.

Hail to thee, lady! and the grace of heaven, Before, behind thee, and on every hand, Enwheel thee round! I thank you, valiant Cassio.

What tidings can you tell me of my lord? He is not yet arrived: nor know I aught But that he's well and will be shortly here.

O, but I fear--How lost you company? The great contention of the sea and skies Parted our fellowship--But, hark! a sail.

Within 'A sail, a sail!' Guns heard They give their greeting to the citadel, This likewise is a friend.

Let it not gall your patience, good Iago, That I extend my manners, 'tis my breeding That gives me this bold show of courtesy.

Kissing her Sir, would she give you so much of her lips As of her tongue she oft bestows on me, You'll have enough.

In faith, too much, I find it still, when I have list to sleep: Marry, before your ladyship, I grant, She puts her tongue a little in her heart, And chides with thinking.

O, fie upon thee, slanderer! Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk: You rise to play and go to bed to work.

What wouldst thou write of me, if thou shouldst praise me? O gentle lady, do not put me to't, For I am nothing, if not critical.

I am not merry, but I do beguile The thing I am, by seeming otherwise.

Come, how wouldst thou praise me? I am about it, but indeed my invention Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frize, It plucks out brains and all: but my Muse labours, And thus she is deliver'd.

If she be fair and wise, fairness and wit, The one's for use, the other useth it.

Well praised! How if she be black and witty? If she be black, and thereto have a wit, She'll find a white that shall her blackness fit.

How if fair and foolish? She never yet was foolish that was fair, For even her folly help'd her to an heir.

These are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i' the alehouse.

What miserable praise hast thou for her that's foul and foolish? There's none so foul and foolish thereunto, But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.

O most lame and impotent conclusion! Do not learn of him, Emilia, though he be thy husband.

How say you, Cassio? is he not a most profane and liberal He speaks home, madam: You may relish him more in the soldier than in the scholar.

whisper: with as little a web as this will I ensnare as great a fly as Cassio.

Ay, smile upon her, do, I will gyve thee in thine own courtship.

Very good, well kissed! an excellent courtesy! 'tis so, indeed.

Yet again your fingers to your lips? would they were clyster-pipes for your sake! Trumpet within The Moor! I know his trumpet.

Lo, where he comes! O my fair warrior! My dear Othello! It gives me wonder great as my content To see you here before me.

News, friends, our wars are done, the Turks are drown'd.

How does my old acquaintance of this isle? Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus, I have found great love amongst them.

O my sweet, I prattle out of fashion, and I dote In mine own comforts.

I prithee, good Iago, Go to the bay and disembark my coffers: Bring thou the master to the citadel, He is a good one, and his worthiness Does challenge much respect.

If thou be'st valiant,-- as, they say, base men being in love have then a nobility in their natures more than is native to them--list me.

The lieutenant tonight watches on the court of guard:--first, I must tell thee this--Desdemona is directly in love with him.

Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed.

Mark me with what violence she first loved the Moor, but for bragging and telling her fantastical lies: and will she love him still for prating? let not thy discreet heart think it.

Besides, the knave is handsome, young, and hath all those requisites in him that folly and green minds look after: a pestilent complete knave, and the woman hath found him already.

I cannot believe that in her, she's full of most blessed condition.

Blessed fig's-end! the wine she drinks is made of grapes: if she had been blessed, she would never have loved the Moor.

Blessed pudding! Didst thou not see her paddle with the palm of his hand? didst not mark that? Yes, that I did, but that was but courtesy.

Lechery, by this hand, an index and obscure prologue to the history of lust and foul thoughts.

They met so near with their lips that their breaths embraced together.

Watch you to-night, for the command, I'll lay't upon you.

I will do this, if I can bring it to any I warrant thee.

Meet me by and by at the citadel: I must fetch his necessaries ashore.

For making him egregiously an ass And practising upon his peace and quiet Even to madness.

'Tis here, but yet confused: Knavery's plain face is never seen tin used.

All offices are open, and there is full liberty of feasting from this present hour of five till the bell have told eleven.

Heaven bless the isle of Cyprus and our noble general Othello! Good Michael, look you to the guard to-night: Let's teach ourselves that honourable stop, Not to outsport discretion.

Iago hath direction what to do, But, notwithstanding, with my personal eye Will I look to't.

Michael, good night: to-morrow with your earliest Let me have speech with you.

To DESDEMONA Come, my dear love, The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue, That profit's yet to come 'tween me and you.

Not this hour, lieutenant, 'tis not yet ten o' the clock.

Our general cast us thus early for the love of his Desdemona, who let us not therefore blame: he hath not yet made wanton the night with her, and she is sport for Jove.

What an eye she has! methinks it sounds a parley of An inviting eye, and yet methinks right modest.

And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love? She is indeed perfection.

Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I have a stoup of wine, and here without are a brace of Cyprus gallants that would fain have a measure to the health of black Othello.

What, man! 'tis a night of revels: the gallants desire it.

Where are they? Here at the door, I pray you, call them in.

If I can fasten but one cup upon him, With that which he hath drunk to-night already, He'll be as full of quarrel and offence As my young mistress' dog.

Now, 'mongst this flock of drunkards, Am I to put our Cassio in some action That may offend the isle.

-But here they come: If consequence do but approve my dream, My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.

Re-enter CASSIO, with him MONTANO and Gentlemen, servants following with wine 'Fore God, they have given me a rouse already.

Good faith, a little one, not past a pint, as I am a soldier.

Some wine, ho! And let me the canakin clink, clink, And let me the canakin clink A soldier's a man, A life's but a span, Why, then, let a soldier drink.

I learned it in England, where, indeed, they are most potent in potting: your Dane, your German, and your swag-bellied Hollander--Drink, ho!--are nothing to your English.

To the health of our general! I am for it, lieutenant, and I'll do you justice.

O sweet England! King Stephen was a worthy peer, His breeches cost him but a crown, He held them sixpence all too dear, With that he call'd the tailor lown.

He was a wight of high renown, And thou art but of low degree: 'Tis pride that pulls the country down, Then take thine auld cloak about thee.

Some wine, ho! Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.

Will you hear't again? No, for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that does those things.

Well, God's above all, and there be souls must be saved, and there be souls must not be saved.

For mine own part,--no offence to the general, nor any man of quality,--I hope to be saved.

Ay, but, by your leave, not before me, the lieutenant is to be saved before the ancient.

-Forgive us our sins!--Gentlemen, let's look to our business.

I am drunk: this is my ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my left: I am not drunk now, I can stand well enough, and speak well enough.

Why, very well then, you must not think then that I am drunk.

To the platform, masters, come, let's set the watch.

On some odd time of his infirmity, Will shake this island.

But is he often thus? 'Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep: He'll watch the horologe a double set, If drink rock not his cradle.

Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio, And looks not on his evils: is not this true? I pray you, after the lieutenant, go.

And 'tis great pity that the noble Moor Should hazard such a place as his own second With one of an ingraft infirmity: It were an honest action to say So to the Moor.

Beat me! Dost thou prate, rogue? Striking RODERIGO Nay, good lieutenant, Staying him I pray you, sir, hold your hand.

Let me go, sir, Or I'll knock you o'er the mazzard.

Re-enter OTHELLO and Attendants What is the matter here? 'Zounds, I bleed still, I am hurt to the death.

Silence that dreadful bell: it frights the isle From her propriety.

What is the matter, masters? Honest Iago, that look'st dead with grieving, Speak, who began this? on thy love, I charge thee.

Give me to know How this foul rout began, who set it on, And he that is approved in this offence, Though he had twinn'd with me, both at a birth, Shall lose me.

What! in a town of war, Yet wild, the people's hearts brimful of fear, To manage private and domestic quarrel, In night, and on the court and guard of safety! 'Tis monstrous.

Iago, who began't? If partially affined, or leagued in office, Thou dost deliver more or less than truth, Thou art no soldier.

Touch me not so near: I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth Than it should do offence to Michael Cassio, Yet, I persuade myself, to speak the truth Shall nothing wrong him.

Thus it is, general. Montano and myself being in speech, There comes a fellow crying out for help: And Cassio following him with determined sword, To execute upon him.

When I came back-- For this was brief--I found them close together, At blow and thrust, even as again they were When you yourself did part them.

I know, Iago, Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter, Making it light to Cassio.

Cassio, I love thee But never more be officer of mine.

Re-enter DESDEMONA, attended Look, if my gentle love be not raised up! I'll make thee an example.

What's the matter? All's well now, sweeting, come away to bed.

Sir, for your hurts, myself will be your surgeon: Lead him off.

To MONTANO, who is led off Iago, look with care about the town, And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted.

Come, Desdemona: 'tis the soldiers' life To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.

What, are you hurt, lieutenant? Ay, past all surgery.

Marry, heaven forbid! Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of myself, and what remains is bestial.

My reputation, Iago, my reputation! As I am an honest man, I thought you had received some bodily wound, there is more sense in that than in reputation.

Reputation is an idle and most false imposition: oft got without merit, and lost without deserving: you have lost no reputation at all, unless you repute yourself such a loser.

I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a commander with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an officer.

Is't possible? I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly, a quarrel, but nothing wherefore.

Come, you are too severe a moraler: as the time, the place, and the condition of this country stands, I could heartily wish this had not befallen, but, since it is as it is, mend it for your own good.

I will ask him for my place again, he shall tell me I am a drunkard! Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would stop them all.

To be now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and presently a beast! O strange! Every inordinate cup is unblessed and the ingredient is a devil.

Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be well used: exclaim no more against it.

And, good lieutenant, I think you think I love you.

I drunk! You or any man living may be drunk! at a time, man.

I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.

I think it freely, and betimes in the morning I will beseech the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me: I am desperate of my fortunes if they cheque me here.

So will I turn her virtue into pitch, And out of her own goodness make the net That shall enmesh them all.

Re-enter RODERIGO How now, Roderigo! I do follow here in the chase, not like a hound that hunts, but one that fills up the cry.

How poor are they that have not patience! What wound did ever heal but by degrees? Thou know'st we work by wit, and not by witchcraft, And wit depends on dilatory time.

And thou, by that small hurt, hast cashier'd Cassio: Though other things grow fair against the sun, Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe: Content thyself awhile.

By the mass, 'tis morning, Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.

Retire thee, go where thou art billeted: Away, I say, thou shalt know more hereafter: Nay, get thee gone.

Masters, play here, I will content your pains, Something that's brief, and bid 'Good morrow, general.

Why masters, have your instruments been in Naples, that they speak i' the nose thus? How, sir, how! Are these, I pray you, wind-instruments? Ay, marry, are they, sir.

sir, by many a wind-instrument that I know. But, masters, here's money for you: and the general so likes your music, that he desires you, for love's sake, to make no more noise with it.

If you have any music that may not be heard, to't again: but, as they say to hear music the general does not greatly care.

Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I'll away: go, vanish into air, away! Dost thou hear, my honest friend? No, I hear not your honest friend, I hear you.

You have not been a-bed, then? Why, no, the day had broke Before we parted.

I have made bold, Iago, To send in to your wife: my suit to her Is, that she will to virtuous Desdemona Procure me some access.

I'll send her to you presently, And I'll devise a mean to draw the Moor Out of the way, that your converse and business May be more free.

Good morrow, good Lieutenant: I am sorry For your displeasure, but all will sure be well.

Yet, I beseech you, If you think fit, or that it may be done, Give me advantage of some brief discourse With Desdemona alone.

Pray you, come in, I will bestow you where you shall have time To speak your bosom freely.

These letters give, Iago, to the pilot, And by him do my duties to the senate: That done, I will be walking on the works, Repair there to me.

This fortification, gentlemen, shall we see't? We'll wait upon your lordship.

Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do All my abilities in thy behalf.

Good madam, do: I warrant it grieves my husband, As if the case were his.

Do not doubt, Cassio, But I will have my lord and you again As friendly as you were.

Bounteous madam, Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio, He's never any thing but your true servant.

You do love my lord: You have known him long, and be you well assured He shall in strangeness stand no further off Than in a polite distance.

Madam, not now: I am very ill at ease, Unfit for mine own purposes.

What dost thou say? Nothing, my lord: or if--I know not what.

Was not that Cassio parted from my wife? Cassio, my lord! No, sure, I cannot think it, That he would steal away so guilty-like, Seeing you coming.

How now, my lord! I have been talking with a suitor here, A man that languishes in your displeasure.

Went he hence now? Ay, sooth, so humbled That he hath left part of his grief with me, To suffer with him.

Good love, call him back. Not now, sweet Desdemona, some other time.

But shall't be shortly? The sooner, sweet, for you.

To-morrow dinner, then? I shall not dine at home, I meet the captains at the citadel.

When shall he come? Tell me, Othello: I wonder in my soul, What you would ask me, that I should deny, Or stand so mammering on.

I will deny thee nothing: Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this, To leave me but a little to myself.

Farewell, my Desdemona: I'll come to thee straight.

Be as your fancies teach you, Whate'er you be, I am obedient.

Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soul, But I do love thee! and when I love thee not, Chaos is come again.

Why of thy thought, Iago? I did not think he had been acquainted with her.

Indeed! ay, indeed: discern'st thou aught in that? Is he not honest? Honest, my lord! Honest! ay, honest.

What dost thou think? Think, my lord! Think, my lord! By heaven, he echoes me, As if there were some monster in his thought Too hideous to be shown.

For Michael Cassio, I dare be sworn I think that he is honest.

Men should be what they seem, Or those that be not, would they might seem none! Certain, men should be what they seem.

Nay, yet there's more in this: I prithee, speak to me as to thy thinkings, As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts The worst of words.

Good my lord, pardon me: Though I am bound to every act of duty, I am not bound to that all slaves are free to.

It were not for your quiet nor your good, Nor for my manhood, honesty, or wisdom, To let you know my thoughts.

You cannot, if my heart were in your hand, Nor shall not, whilst 'tis in my custody.

Dost thou say so? She did deceive her father, marrying you, And when she seem'd to shake and fear your looks, She loved them most.

I hope you will consider what is spoke Comes from my love.

But I do see you're moved: I am to pray you not to strain my speech To grosser issues nor to larger reach Than to suspicion.

Should you do so, my lord, My speech should fall into such vile success As my thoughts aim not at.

Cassio's my worthy friend-- My lord, I see you're moved.

No, not much moved: I do not think but Desdemona's honest.

But pardon me, I do not in position Distinctly speak of her, though I may fear Her will, recoiling to her better judgment, May fall to match you with her country forms And happily repent.

In the mean time, Let me be thought too busy in my fears-- As worthy cause I have to fear I am-- And hold her free, I do beseech your honour.

This fellow's of exceeding honesty, And knows all qualities, with a learned spirit, Of human dealings.

If I do prove her haggard, Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings, I'ld whistle her off and let her down the wind, To pray at fortune.

Haply, for I am black And have not those soft parts of conversation That chamberers have, or for I am declined Into the vale of years,--yet that's not much-- She's gone.

Yet, 'tis the plague of great ones, Prerogatived are they less than the base, 'Tis destiny unshunnable, like death: Even then this forked plague is fated to us When we do quicken.

Desdemona comes: Re-enter DESDEMONA and EMILIA If she be false, O, then heaven mocks itself! I'll not believe't.

How now, my dear Othello! Your dinner, and the generous islanders By you invited, do attend your presence.

Why do you speak so faintly? Are you not well? I have a pain upon my forehead here.

'Faith, that's with watching, 'twill away again: Let me but bind it hard, within this hour It will be well.

Your napkin is too little: He puts the handkerchief from him, and it drops Let it alone.

Come, I'll go in with you. I am very sorry that you are not well.

I'll have the work ta'en out, And give't Iago: what he will do with it Heaven knows, not I, I nothing but to please his fantasy.

Re-enter Iago How now! what do you here alone? Do not you chide, I have a thing for you.

A thing for me? it is a common thing-- To have a foolish wife.

O, is that all? What will you give me now For the same handkerchief? What handkerchief? What handkerchief? Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona, That which so often you did bid me steal.

Hast stol'n it from her? No, 'faith, she let it drop by negligence.

What will you do with 't, that you have been so earnest To have me filch it? If it be not for some purpose of import, Give't me again: poor lady, she'll run mad When she shall lack it.

I will in Cassio's lodging lose this napkin, And let him find it.

Trifles light as air Are to the jealous confirmations strong As proofs of holy writ: this may do something.

The Moor already changes with my poison: Dangerous conceits are, in their natures, poisons.

Which at the first are scarce found to distaste, But with a little act upon the blood.

I did say so: Look, where he comes! Re-enter OTHELLO Not poppy, nor mandragora, Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world, Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep Which thou owedst yesterday.

Ha! ha! false to me? Why, how now, general! no more of that.

Avaunt! be gone! thou hast set me on the rack: I swear 'tis better to be much abused Than but to know't a little.

I had been happy, if the general camp, Pioners and all, had tasted her sweet body, So I had nothing known.

O grace! O heaven forgive me! Are you a man? have you a soul or sense? God be wi' you, take mine office.

O wretched fool. That livest to make thine honesty a vice! O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world, To be direct and honest is not safe.

I thank you for this profit, and from hence I'll love no friend, sith love breeds such offence.

I should be wise, for honesty's a fool And loses that it works for.

By the world, I think my wife be honest and think she is not, I think that thou art just and think thou art not.

Her name, that was as fresh As Dian's visage, is now begrimed and black As mine own face.

If there be cords, or knives, Poison, or fire, or suffocating streams, I'll not endure it.

Would I were satisfied! I see, sir, you are eaten up with passion: I do repent me that I put it to you.

But yet, I say, If imputation and strong circumstances, Which lead directly to the door of truth, Will give you satisfaction, you may have't.

I do not like the office: But, sith I am enter'd in this cause so far, Prick'd to't by foolish honesty and love, I will go on.

I lay with Cassio lately, And, being troubled with a raging tooth, I could not sleep.

But this denoted a foregone conclusion: 'Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream.

And this may help to thicken other proofs That do demonstrate thinly.

Nay, but be wise: yet we see nothing done, She may be honest yet.

Tell me but this, Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief Spotted with strawberries in your wife's hand? I gave her such a one, 'twas my first gift.

I know not that, but such a handkerchief-- I am sure it was your wife's--did I to-day See Cassio wipe his beard with.

If it be that-- If it be that, or any that was hers, It speaks against her with the other proofs.

O, that the slave had forty thousand lives! One is too poor, too weak for my revenge.

Look here, Iago, All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven.

Arise, black vengeance, from thy hollow cell! Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught, For 'tis of aspics' tongues! Yet be content.

O, blood, blood, blood! Patience, I say, your mind perhaps may change.

Now, by yond marble heaven, In the due reverence of a sacred vow I here engage my words.

They rise I greet thy love, Not with vain thanks, but with acceptance bounteous, And will upon the instant put thee to't: Within these three days let me hear thee say That Cassio's not alive.

My friend is dead, 'tis done at your request: But let her live.

Damn her, lewd minx! O, damn her! Come, go with me apart, I will withdraw, To furnish me with some swift means of death For the fair devil.

Now art thou my lieutenant. I am your own for ever.

Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies? I dare not say he lies any where.

Why, man? He's a soldier, and for one to say a soldier lies, is stabbing.

Go to: where lodges he? To tell you where he lodges, is to tell you where I lie.

Can any thing be made of this? I know not where he lodges, and for me to devise a lodging and say he lies here or he lies there, were to lie in mine own throat.

Can you inquire him out, and be edified by report? I will catechise the world for him, that is, make questions, and by them answer.

Seek him, bid him come hither: tell him I have moved my lord on his behalf, and hope all will be well.

To do this is within the compass of man's wit: and therefore I will attempt the doing it.

Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia? I know not, madam.

Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse Full of crusadoes: and, but my noble Moor Is true of mind and made of no such baseness As jealous creatures are, it were enough To put him to ill thinking.

Is he not jealous? Who, he? I think the sun where he was born Drew all such humours from him.

I will not leave him now till Cassio Be call'd to him.

O, hardness to dissemble!-- How do you, Desdemona? Well, my good lord.

You may, indeed, say so, For 'twas that hand that gave away my heart.

A liberal hand: the hearts of old gave hands, But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.

Come now, your promise. What promise, chuck? I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.

I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me, Lend me thy handkerchief.

I did so: and take heed on't, Make it a darling like your precious eye, To lose't or give't away were such perdition As nothing else could match.

Indeed! is't true? Most veritable, therefore look to't well.

This is a trick to put me from my suit: Pray you, let Cassio be received again.

Come, come, You'll never meet a more sufficient man.

The handkerchief! A man that all his time Hath founded his good fortunes on your love, Shared dangers with you,-- The handkerchief! In sooth, you are to blame.

Sure, there's some wonder in this handkerchief: I am most unhappy in the loss of it.

'Tis not a year or two shows us a man: They are all but stomachs, and we all but food, To eat us hungerly, and when they are full, They belch us.

Look you, Cassio and my husband! There is no other way, 'tis she must do't: And, lo, the happiness! go, and importune her.

Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio! My advocation is not now in tune, My lord is not my lord, nor should I know him, Were he in favour as in humour alter'd.

Is my lord angry? He went hence but now, And certainly in strange unquietness.

Beshrew me much, Emilia, I was, unhandsome warrior as I am, Arraigning his unkindness with my soul, But now I find I had suborn'd the witness, And he's indicted falsely.

Pray heaven it be state-matters, as you think, And no conception nor no jealous toy Concerning you.

But jealous souls will not be answer'd so, They are not ever jealous for the cause, But jealous for they are jealous: 'tis a monster Begot upon itself, born on itself.

Heaven keep that monster from Othello's mind! Lady, amen.

Cassio, walk hereabout: If I do find him fit, I'll move your suit And seek to effect it to my uttermost.

Save you, friend Cassio! What make you from home? How is it with you, my most fair Bianca? I' faith, sweet love, I was coming to your house.

Sweet Bianca, Giving her DESDEMONA's handkerchief Take me this work out.

O Cassio, whence came this? This is some token from a newer friend: To the felt absence now I feel a cause: Is't come to this? Well, well.

Go to, woman! Throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth, From whence you have them.

You are jealous now That this is from some mistress, some remembrance: No, in good troth, Bianca.

Why, whose is it? I know not, sweet: I found it in my chamber.

I like the work well: ere it be demanded-- As like enough it will--I'ld have it copied: Take it, and do't, and leave me for this time.

Leave you! wherefore? I do attend here on the general, And think it no addition, nor my wish, To have him see me woman'd.

I pray you, bring me on the way a little, And say if I shall see you soon at night.

'Tis but a little way that I can bring you, For I attend here: but I'll see you soon.

Will you think so? Think so, Iago! To kiss in private? An unauthorized kiss.

So they do nothing, 'tis a venial slip: But if I give my wife a handkerchief,-- What then? Why, then, 'tis hers, my lord, and, being hers, She may, I think, bestow't on any man.

Thou said'st, it comes o'er my memory, As doth the raven o'er the infected house, Boding to all--he had my handkerchief.

What hath he said? 'Faith, that he did--I know not what he did.

What? what? With her? With her, on her, what you will.

Lie with her! lie on her! We say lie on her, when they belie her.

Lie with her! that's fulsome. confess, and be hanged for his labour,--first, to be hanged, and then to confess.

-I tremble at it. Nature would not invest herself in such shadowing passion without some instruction.

What, ho! my lord! My lord, I say! Othello! How now, Cassio! What's the matter? My lord is fall'n into an epilepsy: This is his second fit, he had one yesterday.

No, forbear, The lethargy must have his quiet course: If not, he foams at mouth and by and by Breaks out to savage madness.

Look he stirs: Do you withdraw yourself a little while, He will recover straight: when he is gone, I would on great occasion speak with you.

How is it, general? have you not hurt your head? Dost thou mock me? I mock you! no, by heaven.

Would you would bear your fortune like a man! A horned man's a monster and a beast.

There's many a beast then in a populous city, And many a civil monster.

O, 'tis the spite of hell, the fiend's arch-mock, To lip a wanton in a secure couch, And to suppose her chaste! No, let me know, And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.

Stand you awhile apart, Confine yourself but in a patient list.

Marry, patience, Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen, And nothing of a man.

Dost thou hear, Iago? I will be found most cunning in my patience, But--dost thou hear?--most bloody.

Here he comes: Re-enter CASSIO As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad, And his unbookish jealousy must construe Poor Cassio's smiles, gestures and light behavior, Quite in the wrong.

How do you now, lieutenant? The worser that you give me the addition Whose want even kills me.

Speaking lower Now, if this suit lay in Bianco's power, How quickly should you speed! Alas, poor caitiff! Look, how he laughs already! I never knew woman love man so.

Alas, poor rogue! I think, i' faith, she loves me.

Do you hear, Cassio? Now he importunes him To tell it o'er: go to, well said, well said.

This is the monkey's own giving out: she is persuaded I will marry her, out of her own love and flattery, not out of my promise.

She was here even now, she haunts me in every place.

So hangs, and lolls, and weeps upon me, so hales, and pulls me: ha, ha, ha! Now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber.

O, I see that nose of yours, but not that dog I shall throw it to.

What do you mean by this haunting of me? Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did you mean by that same handkerchief you gave me even now? I was a fine fool to take it.

How now, my sweet Bianca! how now! how now! By heaven, that should be my handkerchief! An you'll come to supper to-night, you may, an you will not, come when you are next prepared for.

Well, I may chance to see you, for I would very fain speak with you.

A fine woman! a fair woman! a sweet woman! Nay, you must forget that.

Ay, let her rot, and perish, and be damned to-night, for she shall not live: no, my heart is turned to stone, I strike it, and it hurts my hand.

O, the world hath not a sweeter creature: she might lie by an emperor's side and command him tasks.

O, a thousand thousand times: and then, of so gentle a condition! Ay, too gentle.

Nay, that's certain: but yet the pity of it, Iago! O Iago, the pity of it, Iago! If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to offend, for, if it touch not you, it comes near nobody.

I will chop her into messes: cuckold me! O, 'tis foul in her.

Get me some poison, Iago, this night: I'll not expostulate with her, lest her body and beauty unprovide my mind again: this night, Iago.

Do it not with poison, strangle her in her bed, even the bed she hath contaminated.

And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker: you shall hear more by midnight.

A trumpet within What trumpet is that same? Something from Venice, sure.

'Tis Lodovico Come from the duke: and, see, your wife is with him.

Gives him a letter I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.

Opens the letter, and reads And what's the news, good cousin Lodovico? I am very glad to see you, signior Welcome to Cyprus.

Cousin, there's fall'n between him and my lord An unkind breach: but you shall make all well.

Are you sure of that? My lord? He did not call, he's busy in the paper.

Is there division 'twixt my lord and Cassio? A most unhappy one: I would do much To atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.

Fire and brimstone! My lord? Are you wise? What, is he angry? May be the letter moved him, For, as I think, they do command him home, Deputing Cassio in his government.

My lord, this would not be believed in Venice, Though I should swear I saw't: 'tis very much: Make her amends, she weeps.

O devil, devil! If that the earth could teem with woman's tears, Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.

Truly, an obedient lady: I do beseech your lordship, call her back.

Proceed you in your tears. Concerning this, sir,--O  well-painted passion!-- I am commanded home.

Sir, I obey the mandate, And will return to Venice.

And, sir, tonight, I do entreat that we may sup together: You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus.

You shall observe him, And his own courses will denote him so That I may save my speech: do but go after, And mark how he continues.

You have seen nothing then? Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.

But then I saw no harm, and then I heard Each syllable that breath made up between them.

Nor send you out o' the way? To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing? Never, my lord.

I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest, Lay down my soul at stake: if you think other, Remove your thought, it doth abuse your bosom.

She says enough, yet she's a simple bawd That cannot say as much.

This is a subtle whore, A closet lock and key of villanous secrets And yet she'll kneel and pray, I have seen her do't.

My lord, what is your will? Pray, chuck, come hither.

What is your pleasure? Let me see your eyes, Look in my face.

What horrible fancy's this? Leave procreants alone and shut the door, Cough, or cry 'hem,' if any body come: Your mystery, your mystery: nay, dispatch.

Upon my knees, what doth your speech import? I understand a fury in your words.

Why, what art thou? Your wife, my lord, your true And loyal wife.

Come, swear it, damn thyself Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves Should fear to seize thee: therefore be double damn'd: Swear thou art honest.

Had it pleased heaven To try me with affliction, had they rain'd All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head.

O, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles, That quicken even with blowing.

What committed! Heaven stops the nose at it and the moon winks, The bawdy wind that kisses all it meets Is hush'd within the hollow mine of earth, And will not hear it.

What committed! Impudent strumpet! By heaven, you do me wrong.

Are you not a strumpet? No, as I am a Christian: If to preserve this vessel for my lord From any other foul unlawful touch Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.

Is't possible? O, heaven forgive us! I cry you mercy, then: I took you for that cunning whore of Venice That married with Othello.

Alas, what does this gentleman conceive? How do you, madam? how do you, my good lady? 'Faith, half asleep.

Good madam, what's the matter with my lord? With who? Why, with my lord, madam.

I have none: do not talk to me, Emilia, I cannot weep, nor answer have I none, But what should go by water.

Prithee, tonight Lay on my bed my wedding sheets: remember, And call thy husband hither.

Here's a change indeed! 'Tis meet I should be used so, very meet.

How have I been behaved, that he might stick The small'st opinion on my least misuse? Re-enter EMILIA with IAGO What is your pleasure, madam? How is't with you? I cannot tell.

Those that do teach young babes Do it with gentle means and easy tasks: He might have chid me so, for, in good faith, I am a child to chiding.

What's the matter, lady? Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her.

Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her, As true hearts cannot bear.

Am I that name, Iago? What name, fair lady? Such as she says my lord did say I was.

He call'd her whore: a beggar in his drink Could not have laid such terms upon his callat.

Why did he so? I do not know, I am sure I am none such.

Alas the day! Hath she forsook so many noble matches, Her father and her country and her friends, To be call'd whore? would it not make one weep? It is my wretched fortune.

Beshrew him for't! How comes this trick upon him? Nay, heaven doth know.

I will be hang'd, if some eternal villain, Some busy and insinuating rogue, Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office, Have not devised this slander, I'll be hang'd else.

O heaven, that such companions thou'ldst unfold, And put in every honest hand a whip To lash the rascals naked through the world Even from the east to the west! Speak within door.

O, fie upon them! Some such squire he was That turn'd your wit the seamy side without, And made you to suspect me with the Moor.

O good Iago, What shall I do to win my lord again? Good friend, go to him, for, by this light of heaven, I know not how I lost him.

And ever will--though he do shake me off To beggarly divorcement--love him dearly, Comfort forswear me! Unkindness may do much, And his unkindness may defeat my life, But never taint my love.

I cannot say 'whore:' It does abhor me now I speak the word, To do the act that might the addition earn Not the world's mass of vanity could make me.

I pray you, be content, 'tis but his humour: The business of the state does him offence, And he does chide with you.

Trumpets within Hark, how these instruments summon to supper! The messengers of Venice stay the meat, Go in, and weep not, all things shall be well.

How now, Roderigo! I do not find that thou dealest justly with me.

What in the contrary? Every day thou daffest me with some device, Iago, and rather, as it seems to me now, keepest from me all conveniency than suppliest me with the least advantage of hope.

I will indeed no longer endure it, nor am I yet persuaded to put up in peace what already I have foolishly suffered.

Will you hear me, Roderigo? 'Faith, I have heard too much, for your words and performances are no kin together.

Very well! go to! I cannot go to, man, nor 'tis not very well: nay, I think it is scurvy, and begin to find myself fobbed in it.

I will make myself known to Desdemona: if she will return me my jewels, I will give over my suit and repent my unlawful solicitation, if not, assure yourself I will seek satisfaction of you.

Ay, and said nothing but what I protest intendment of doing.

Why, now I see there's mettle in thee, and even from this instant to build on thee a better opinion than ever before.

Give me thy hand, Roderigo: thou hast taken against me a most just exception, but yet, I protest, I have dealt most directly in thy affair.

I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your suspicion is not without wit and judgment.

Well, what is it? is it within reason and compass? Sir, there is especial commission come from Venice to depute Cassio in Othello's place.

Is that true? why, then Othello and Desdemona return again to Venice.

O, no, he goes into Mauritania and takes away with him the fair Desdemona, unless his abode be lingered here by some accident: wherein none can be so determinate as the removing of Cassio.

How do you mean, removing of him? Why, by making him uncapable of Othello's place, knocking out his brains.

And that you would have me to do? Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right.

He sups to-night with a harlotry, and thither will I go to him: he knows not yet of his horrorable fortune.

If you will watch his going thence, which I will fashion to fall out between twelve and one, you may take him at your pleasure: I will be near to second your attempt, and he shall fall between us.

Come, stand not amazed at it, but go along with me, I will show you such a necessity in his death that you shall think yourself bound to put it on him.

It is now high suppertime, and the night grows to waste: about it.

I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.

Will you walk, sir? My lord? Get you to bed on the instant, I will be returned forthwith: dismiss your attendant there: look it be done.

He says he will return incontinent: He hath commanded me to go to bed, And bade me to dismiss you.

Dismiss me! It was his bidding: therefore, good Emilia,.

Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu: We must not now displease him.

I would you had never seen him! So would not I	my love doth so approve him, That even his stubbornness, his cheques, his frowns-- Prithee, unpin me,--have grace and favour in them.

Good faith, how foolish are our minds! If I do die before thee prithee, shroud me In one of those same sheets.

Prithee, dispatch. Shall I go fetch your night-gown? No, unpin me here.

I know a lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.

Let nobody blame him, his scorn I approve,- Nay, that's not next.

said he then? Sing willow, willow, willow: If I court moe women, you'll couch with moe men! So, get thee gone, good night Ate eyes do itch, Doth that bode weeping? 'Tis neither here nor there.

O, these men, these men! Dost thou in conscience think,--tell me, Emilia,-- That there be women do abuse their husbands In such gross kind? There be some such, no question.

Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world? Why, would not you? No, by this heavenly light! Nor I neither by this heavenly light, I might do't as well i' the dark.

Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world? The world's a huge thing: it is a great price.

In troth, I think I should, and undo't when I had done.

Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrong For the whole world.

Why the wrong is but a wrong i' the world: and having the world for your labour, tis a wrong in your own world, and you might quickly make it right.

Yes, a dozen, and as many to the vantage as would store the world they played for.

Let husbands know Their wives have sense like them: they see and smell And have their palates both for sweet and sour, As husbands have.

I have no great devotion to the deed, And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons: 'Tis but a man gone.

Forth, my sword: he dies. I have rubb'd this young quat almost to the sense, And he grows angry.

But so: I hear him coming. I know his gait, 'tis he.

-Villain, thou diest! Makes a pass at CASSIO That thrust had been mine enemy indeed, But that my coat is better than thou know'st I will make proof of thine.

Draws, and wounds RODERIGO O, I am slain! IAGO from behind wounds CASSIO in the leg, and exit I am maim'd for ever.

Help, ho! murder! murder! The voice of Cassio: Iago keeps his word.

O, help, ho! light! a surgeon! 'Tis he:--O brave Iago, honest and just, That hast such noble sense of thy friend's wrong! Thou teachest me.

Minion, your dear lies dead, And your unblest fate hies: strumpet, I come.

Forth of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are blotted, Thy bed, lust-stain'd, shall with lust's blood be spotted.

What, ho! no watch? no passage? murder! murder! 'Tis some mischance, the cry is very direful.

O, help! O wretched villain! Two or three groan: it is a heavy night: These may be counterfeits: let's think't unsafe To come in to the cry without more help.

Re-enter IAGO, with a light Here's one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.

Who's there? whose noise is this that ones on murder? We do not know.

Did not you hear a cry? Here, here! for heaven's sake, help me! What's the matter? This is Othello's ancient, as I take it.

What are you here that cry so grievously? Iago? O, I am spoil'd, undone by villains! Give me some help.

O me, lieutenant! what villains have done this? I think that one of them is hereabout, And cannot make away.

O treacherous villains! What are you there? come in, and give some help.

To LODOVICO and GRATIANO O, help me here! That's one of them.

Here's Cassio hurt by villains. How is't, brother! My leg is cut in two.

Marry, heaven forbid! Light, gentlemen, I'll bind it with my shirt.

So. O, for a chair, To bear him easily hence! Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio! Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash To be a party in this injury.

Know we this face or no? Alas my friend and my dear countryman Roderigo! no:--yes, sure: O heaven! Roderigo.

What, of Venice? Even he, sir, did you know him? Know him! ay.

Signior Gratiano? I cry you gentle pardon, These bloody accidents must excuse my manners, That so neglected you.

How do you, Cassio? O, a chair, a chair! He, he 'tis he.

A chair brought in O, that's well said, the chair! Some good man bear him carefully from hence, I'll fetch the general's surgeon.

To BIANCA For you, mistress, Save you your labour.

He that lies slain here, Cassio, Was my dear friend: what malice was between you? None in the world, nor do I know the man.

CASSIO and RODERIGO are borne off Stay you, good gentlemen.

Look you pale, mistress? Do you perceive the gastness of her eye? Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.

Behold her well, I pray you, look upon her: Do you see, gentlemen? nay, guiltiness will speak, Though tongues were out of use.

'Las, what's the matter? what's the matter, husband? Cassio hath here been set on in the dark By Roderigo and fellows that are scaped: He's almost slain, and Roderigo dead.

Alas, good gentleman! alas, good Cassio! This is the fruit of whoring.

Prithee, Emilia, Go know of Cassio where he supp'd to-night.

To BIANCA What, do you shake at that? He supp'd at my house, but I therefore shake not.

Fie, fie upon thee, strumpet! I am no strumpet, but of life as honest As you that thus abuse me.

As I! foh! fie upon thee! Kind gentlemen, let's go see poor Cassio dress'd.

Emilia run you to the citadel, And tell my lord and lady what hath happ'd.

This is the night That either makes me or fordoes me quite.

It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul,-- Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars!-- It is the cause.

Yet I'll not shed her blood, Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow, And smooth as monumental alabaster.

When I have pluck'd the rose, I cannot give it vital growth again.

Kissing her Ah balmy breath, that dost almost persuade Justice to break her sword! One more, one more.

Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee, And love thee after.

One more, and this the last: So sweet was ne'er so fatal.

I must weep, But they are cruel tears: this sorrow's heavenly, It strikes where it doth love.

Desdemona. Will you come to bed, my lord? Have you pray'd to-night, Desdemona? Ay, my lord.

If you bethink yourself of any crime Unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace, Solicit for it straight.

Alas, my lord, what do you mean by that? Well, do it, and be brief, I will walk by: I would not kill thy unprepared spirit, No, heaven forfend! I would not kill thy soul.

Then heaven Have mercy on me! Amen, with all my heart! If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.

And yet I fear you, for you are fatal then When your eyes roll so: why I should fear I know not, Since guiltiness I know not, but yet I feel I fear.

Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip? Some bloody passion shakes your very frame: These are portents, but yet I hope, I hope, They do not point on me.

What's the matter? That handkerchief which I so loved and gave thee Thou gavest to Cassio.

No, by my life and soul! Send for the man, and ask him.

Sweet soul, take heed, Take heed of perjury, thou art on thy deathbed.

Yes, presently: Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin, For to deny each article with oath Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception That I do groan withal.

Thou art to die. Then Lord have mercy on me! I say, amen.

And have you mercy too! I never did Offend you in my life, never loved Cassio But with such general warranty of heaven As I might love: I never gave him token.

O perjured woman! thou dost stone my heart, And makest me call what I intend to do A murder, which I thought a sacrifice: I saw the handkerchief.

He found it then, I never gave it him: send for him hither, Let him confess a truth.

No, his mouth is stopp'd, Honest Iago hath ta'en order for't.

O! my fear interprets: what, is he dead? Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge Had stomach for them all.

He stifles her What noise is this? Not dead? not yet quite dead? I that am cruel am yet merciful, I would not have thee linger in thy pain: So, so.

By and by. She's dead. 'Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio's death.

Shall she come in? were't good?-- I think she stirs again:--no.

What's best to do? If she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife: My wife! my wife! what wife? I have no wife.

O insupportable! O heavy hour! Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse Of sun and moon, and that the affrighted globe Should yawn at alteration.

That I may speak with you, O, good my lord! I had forgot thee: O, come in, Emilia, Soft, by and by.

Let me the curtains draw. Where art thou? Unlocks the door What's the matter with thee now? O, my good lord, yonder's foul murders done! What, now? But now, my lord.

It is the very error of the moon, She comes more nearer earth than she was wont, And makes men mad.

Cassio, my lord, hath kill'd a young Venetian Call'd Roderigo.

Roderigo kill'd! And Cassio kill'd! No, Cassio is not kill'd.

Not Cassio kill'd! then murder's out of tune, And sweet revenge grows harsh.

O, falsely, falsely murder'd! Alas, what cry is that? That! what? Out, and alas! that was my lady's voice.

Help! help, ho! help! O lady, speak again! Sweet Desdemona! O sweet mistress, speak! A guiltless death I die.

Farewell Commend me to my kind lord: O, farewell! Why, how should she be murder'd? Alas, who knows? You heard her say herself, it was not I.

She's, like a liar, gone to burning hell: 'Twas I that kill'd her.

O, the more angel she, And you the blacker devil! She turn'd to folly, and she was a whore.

Thou art rash as fire, to say That she was false: O, she was heavenly true! Cassio did top her, ask thy husband else.

O, I were damn'd beneath all depth in hell, But that I did proceed upon just grounds To this extremity.

Nay, had she been true, If heaven would make me such another world Of one entire and Perfect chrysolite, I'ld not have sold her for it.

My husband! Ay, 'twas he that told me first: An honest man he is, and hates the slime That sticks on filthy deeds.

My husband! What needs this iteration, woman? I say thy husband.

O mistress, villany hath made mocks with love, My husband say that she was false! He, woman, I say thy husband: dost understand the word? My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Iago.

If he say so, may his pernicious soul Rot half a grain a day! he lies to the heart: She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.

Do thy worst: This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven Than thou wast worthy her.

Thou hast not half that power to do me harm As I have to be hurt.

O gull! O dolt! As ignorant as dirt! thou hast done a deed-- I care not for thy sword, I'll make thee known, Though I lost twenty lives.

-Help! help, ho! help! The Moor hath kill'd my mistress! Murder! murder! What is the matter? How now, general! O, are you come, Iago? you have done well, That men must lay their murders on your neck.

What is the matter? Disprove this villain, if thou be'st a man: He says thou told'st him that his wife was false: I know thou didst not, thou'rt not such a villain: Speak, for my heart is full.

I told him what I thought, and told no more Than what he found himself was apt and true.

You told a lie, an odious, damned lie, Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie.

She false with Cassio!--did you say with Cassio? With Cassio, mistress.

Go to, charm your tongue. I will not charm my tongue, I am bound to speak: My mistress here lies murder'd in her bed,-- O heavens forfend! And your reports have set the murder on.

Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak: 'Tis proper I obey him, but not now.

O! O! O! He falls on the bed Nay, lay thee down and roar, For thou hast kill'd the sweetest innocent That e'er did lift up eye.

I scarce did know you, uncle: there lies your niece, Whose breath, indeed, these hands have newly stopp'd: I know this act shows horrible and grim.

O heaven! O heavenly powers! Come, hold your peace.

'Twill out, 'twill out: I peace! No, I will speak as liberal as the north: Let heaven and men and devils, let them all, All, all, cry shame against me, yet I'll speak.

Villanous whore! She give it Cassio! no, alas! I found it, And I did give't my husband.

Filth, thou liest! By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen.

Take you this weapon, Which I have here recover'd from the Moor: Come, guard the door without, let him not pass, But kill him rather.

I'll after that same villain, For 'tis a damned slave.

I am not valiant neither, But ever puny whipster gets my sword: But why should honour outlive honesty? Let it go all.

What did thy song bode, lady? Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan.

Willow, willow, willow,-- Moor, she was chaste, she loved thee, cruel Moor, So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true, So speaking as I think, I die, I die.

I have another weapon in this chamber, It is a sword of Spain, the ice-brook's temper:-- O, here it is.

Uncle, I must come forth. Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.

Look in upon me then and speak with me, Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.

Be not afraid, though you do see me weapon'd, Here is my journey's end, here is my butt, And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.

Do you go back dismay'd? 'tis a lost fear, Man but a rush against Othello's breast, And he retires.

I am not sorry neither: I'ld have thee live, For, in my sense, 'tis happiness to die.

This wretch hath part confess'd his villany: Did you and he consent in Cassio's death? Dear general, I never gave you cause.

Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body? Demand me nothing: what you know, you know: From this time forth I never will speak word.

Sir, you shall understand what hath befall'n, Which, as I think, you know not.

Here is a letter Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo, And here another: the one of them imports The death of Cassio to be undertook By Roderigo.

You must forsake this room, and go with us: Your power and your command is taken off, And Cassio rules in Cyprus.

For this slave, If there be any cunning cruelty That can torment him much and hold him long, It shall be his.

You shall close prisoner rest, Till that the nature of your fault be known To the Venetian state.

Come, bring him away. Soft you, a word or two before you go.

I have done the state some service, and they know't.

Set you down this, And say besides, that in Aleppo once, Where a malignant and a turban'd Turk Beat a Venetian and traduced the state, I took by the throat the circumcised dog, And smote him, thus.

Stabs himself O bloody period! All that's spoke is marr'd.

I kiss'd thee ere I kill'd thee: no way but this, Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.

Falls on the bed, and dies This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon, For he was great of heart.

More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea! Look on the tragic loading of this bed, This is thy work: the object poisons sight, Let it be hid.

Gratiano, keep the house, And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor, For they succeed on you.

Before the palace of Antioch To sing a song that old was sung, From ashes ancient Gower is come, Assuming man's infirmities, To glad your ear, and please your eyes.

It hath been sung at festivals, On ember-eves and holy-ales, And lords and ladies in their lives Have read it for restoratives: The purchase is to make men glorious, Et bonum quo antiquius, eo melius.

If you, born in these latter times, When wit's more ripe, accept my rhymes.

And that to hear an old man sing May to your wishes pleasure bring I life would wish, and that I might Waste it for you, like taper-light.

What now ensues, to the judgment of your eye I give, my cause who best can justify.

Young prince of Tyre, you have at large received The danger of the task you undertake.

I have, Antiochus, and, with a soul Embolden'd with the glory of her praise, Think death no hazard in this enterprise.

To the Daughter of ANTIOCHUS Thus ready for the way of life or death, I wait the sharpest blow, Antiochus.

Scorning advice, read the conclusion then: Which read and not expounded, 'tis decreed, As these before thee thou thyself shalt bleed.

Of all say'd yet, mayst thou prove prosperous! Of all say'd yet, I wish thee happiness! Like a bold champion, I assume the lists, Nor ask advice of any other thought But faithfulness and courage.

He reads the riddle I am no viper, yet I feed On mother's flesh which did me breed.

I sought a husband, in which labour I found that kindness in a father: He's father, son, and husband mild, I mother, wife, and yet his child.

How they may be, and yet in two, As you will live, resolve it you.

For that's an article within our law, As dangerous as the rest.

Your time's expired: Either expound now, or receive your sentence.

Great king, Few love to hear the sins they love to act, 'Twould braid yourself too near for me to tell it.

Who has a book of all that monarchs do, He's more secure to keep it shut than shown: For vice repeated is like the wandering wind.

Blows dust in other's eyes, to spread itself, And yet the end of all is bought thus dear, The breath is gone, and the sore eyes see clear: To stop the air would hurt them.

The blind mole casts Copp'd hills towards heaven, to tell the earth is throng'd By man's oppression, and the poor worm doth die for't.

Kings are earth's gods, in vice their law's their will, And if Jove stray, who dares say Jove doth ill? It is enough you know, and it is fit, What being more known grows worse, to smother it.

All love the womb that their first being bred, Then give my tongue like leave to love my head.

Antioch, farewell! for wisdom sees, those men Blush not in actions blacker than the night, Will shun no course to keep them from the light.

Re-enter ANTIOCHUS He hath found the meaning, for which we mean To have his head.

He must not live to trumpet forth my infamy, Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sin In such a loathed manner, And therefore instantly this prince must die: For by his fall my honour must keep high.

Who attends us there? Doth your highness call? You are of our chamber, and our mind partakes Her private actions to your secrecy, And for your faithfulness we will advance you.

Thaliard, behold, here's poison, and here's gold, We hate the prince of Tyre, and thou must kill him: It fits thee not to ask the reason why, Because we bid it.

Let your breath cool yourself, telling your haste.

As thou Wilt live, fly after: and like an arrow shot From a well-experienced archer hits the mark His eye doth level at, so thou ne'er return Unless thou say 'Prince Pericles is dead.

My lord, If I can get him within my pistol's length, I'll make him sure enough: so, farewell to your highness.

Thaliard, adieu! Till Pericles be dead, My heart can lend no succor to my head.

Joy and all comfort in your sacred breast! And keep your mind, till you return to us, Peaceful and comfortable! Peace, peace, and give experience tongue.

When Signior Sooth here does proclaim a peace, He flatters you, makes war upon your life.

Prince, pardon me, or strike me, if you please, I cannot be much lower than my knees.

All leave us else, but let your cares o'erlook What shipping and what lading's in our haven, And then return to us.

Helicanus, thou Hast moved us: what seest thou in our looks? An angry brow, dread lord.

I have ground the axe myself, Do you but strike the blow.

Thou speak'st like a physician, Helicanus, That minister'st a potion unto me That thou wouldst tremble to receive thyself.

Attend me, then: I went to Antioch, Where as thou know'st, against the face of death, I sought the purchase of a glorious beauty.

From whence an issue I might propagate, Are arms to princes, and bring joys to subjects.

Such fear so grew in me, I hither fled, Under the covering of a careful night, Who seem'd my good protector, and, being here, Bethought me what was past, what might succeed.

Well, my lord, since you have given me leave to speak.

Antiochus you fear, And justly too, I think, you fear the tyrant, Who either by public war or private treason Will take away your life.

Therefore, my lord, go travel for a while, Till that his rage and anger be forgot, Or till the Destinies do cut his thread of life.

I do not doubt thy faith, But should he wrong my liberties in my absence? We'll mingle our bloods together in the earth, From whence we had our being and our birth.

Tyre, I now look from thee then, and to Tarsus Intend my travel, where I'll hear from thee, And by whose letters I'll dispose myself.

The care I had and have of subjects' good On thee I lay whose wisdom's strength can bear it.

Here must I kill King Pericles, and if I do it not, I am sure to be hanged at home: 'tis dangerous.

You shall not need, my fellow peers of Tyre, Further to question me of your king's departure: His seal'd commission, left in trust with me, Doth speak sufficiently he's gone to travel.

If further yet you will be satisfied, Why, as it were unlicensed of your loves, He would depart, I'll give some light unto you.

I shall not be hang'd now, although I would, But since he's gone, the king's seas must please: He 'scaped the land, to perish at the sea.

Peace to the lords of Tyre! Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome.

From him I come With message unto princely Pericles, But since my landing I have understood Your lord has betook himself to unknown travels, My message must return from whence it came.

We have no reason to desire it, Commended to our master, not to us: Yet, ere you shall depart, this we desire, As friends to Antioch, we may feast in Tyre.

O my distressed lord, even such our griefs are, Here they're but felt, and seen with mischief's eyes, But like to groves, being topp'd, they higher rise.

I'll then discourse our woes, felt several years, And wanting breath to speak help me with tears.

Is not this true? Our cheeks and hollow eyes do witness it.

O, let those cities that of plenty's cup And her prosperities so largely taste, With their superfluous riots, hear these tears! The misery of Tarsus may be theirs.

Where's the lord governor? Speak out thy sorrows which thou bring'st in haste, For comfort is too far for us to expect.

We have descried, upon our neighbouring shore, A portly sail of ships make hitherward.

That's the least fear, for, by the semblance Of their white flags display'd, they bring us peace, And come to us as favourers, not as foes.

Thou speak'st like him's untutor'd to repeat: Who makes the fairest show means most deceit.

But bring they what they will and what they can, What need we fear? The ground's the lowest, and we are half way there.

Go tell their general we attend him here, To know for what he comes, and whence he comes, And what he craves.

Welcome is peace, if he on peace consist, If wars, we are unable to resist.

Lord governor, for so we hear you are, Let not our ships and number of our men Be like a beacon fired to amaze your eyes.

The gods of Greece protect you! And we'll pray for you.

Arise, I pray you, rise: We do not look for reverence, but to love, And harbourage for ourself, our ships, and men.

Which welcome we'll accept, feast here awhile, Until our stars that frown lend us a smile.

Here have you seen a mighty king His child, I wis, to incest bring, A better prince and benign lord, That will prove awful both in deed and word.

Be quiet then as men should be, Till he hath pass'd necessity.

I'll show you those in troubles reign, Losing a mite, a mountain gain.

What shall be next, Pardon old Gower,--this longs the text.

What, ho, Pilch! Ha, come and bring away the nets! What, Patch-breech, I say! What say you, master? Look how thou stirrest now! come away, or I'll fetch thee with a wanion.

Faith, master, I am thinking of the poor men that were cast away before us even now.

Alas, poor souls, it grieved my heart to hear what pitiful cries they made to us to help them, when, well-a-day, we could scarce help ourselves.

Nay, master, said not I as much when I saw the porpus how he bounced and tumbled? they say they're half fish, half flesh: a plague on them, they ne'er come but I look to be washed.

But, master, if I had been the sexton, I would have been that day in the belfry.

But if the good King Simonides were of my mind,-- We would purge the land of these drones, that rob the bee of her honey.

These fishers tell the infirmities of men, And from their watery empire recollect All that may men approve or men detect! Peace be at your labour, honest fishermen.

Honest! good fellow, what's that? If it be a day fits you, search out of the calendar, and nobody look after it.

No, friend, cannot you beg? Here's them in our country Greece gets more with begging than we can do with working.

Canst thou catch any fishes, then? I never practised it.

Nay, then thou wilt starve, sure, for here's nothing to be got now-a-days, unless thou canst fish for't.

Die quoth-a? Now gods forbid! I have a gown here, come, put it on, keep thee warm.

Now, afore me, a handsome fellow! Come, thou shalt go home, and we'll have flesh for holidays, fish for fasting-days, and moreo'er puddings and flap-jacks, and thou shalt be welcome.

But crave! Then I'll turn craver too, and so I shall 'scape whipping.

Why, are all your beggars whipped, then? O, not all, my friend, not all, for if all your beggars were whipped, I would wish no better office than to be beadle.

But, master, I'll go draw up the Hark you, sir, do you know where ye are? Not well.

Why, I'll tell you: this is called Pentapolis, and our king the good Simonides.

Ay, sir, and he deserves so to be called for his peaceable reign and good government.

He is a happy king, since he gains from his subjects the name of good by his government.

Were my fortunes equal to my desires, I could wish to make one there.

O, sir, things must be as they may, and what a man cannot get, he may lawfully deal for--his wife's soul.

Re-enter Second and Third Fishermen, drawing up a net Help, master, help! here's a fish hangs in the net, like a poor man's right in the law, 'twill hardly come out.

Ha! bots on't, 'tis come at last, and 'tis turned to a rusty armour.

Thanks, fortune, yet, that, after all my crosses, Thou givest me somewhat to repair myself, And though it was mine own, part of my heritage, Which my dead father did bequeath to me.

What mean you, sir? To beg of you, kind friends, this coat of worth, For it was sometime target to a king, I know it by this mark.

Why, wilt thou tourney for the lady? I'll show the virtue I have borne in arms.

I hope, sir, if you thrive, you'll remember from whence you had it.

Only, my friend, I yet am unprovided Of a pair of bases.

We'll sure provide: thou shalt have my best gown to make thee a pair, and I'll bring thee to the court myself.

Then honour be but a goal to my will, This day I'll rise, or else add ill to ill.

A pavilion by the side of it for the reception of King, Princess, Lords,  and c.

Are the knights ready to begin the triumph? They are, my liege, And stay your coming to present themselves.

Return them, we are ready, and our daughter, In honour of whose birth these triumphs are, Sits here, like beauty's child, whom nature gat For men to see, and seeing wonder at.

It pleaseth you, my royal father, to express My commendations great, whose merit's less.

It's fit it should be so, for princes are A model which heaven makes like to itself: As jewels lose their glory if neglected, So princes their renowns if not respected.

'Tis now your honour, daughter, to explain The labour of each knight in his device.

Who is the first that doth prefer himself? A knight of Sparta, my renowned father, And the device he bears upon his shield Is a black Ethiope reaching at the sun The word, 'Lux tua vita mihi.

The Third Knight passes over And what's the third? The third of Antioch, And his device, a wreath of chivalry, The word, 'Me pompae provexit apex.

The Fourth Knight passes over What is the fourth? A burning torch that's turned upside down, The word, 'Quod me alit, me extinguit.

Which shows that beauty hath his power and will, Which can as well inflame as it can kill.

The Fifth Knight passes over The fifth, an hand environed with clouds, Holding out gold that's by the touchstone tried, The motto thus, 'Sic spectanda fides.

A pretty moral, From the dejected state wherein he is, He hopes by you his fortunes yet may flourish.

He had need mean better than his outward show Can any way speak in his just commend, For by his rusty outside he appears To have practised more the whipstock than the lance.

He well may be a stranger, for he comes To an honour'd triumph strangely furnished.

And on set purpose let his armour rust Until this day, to scour it in the dust.

Opinion's but a fool, that makes us scan The outward habit by the inward man.

But stay, the knights are coming: we will withdraw Into the gallery.

Great shouts within and all cry 'The mean knight!' To say you're welcome were superfluous.

To place upon the volume of your deeds, As in a title-page, your worth in arms, Were more than you expect, or more than's fit, Since every worth in show commends itself.

Prepare for mirth, for mirth becomes a feast: You are princes and my guests.

But you, my knight and guest, To whom this wreath of victory I give, And crown you king of this day's happiness.

Call it by what you will, the day is yours, And here, I hope, is none that envies it.

In framing an artist, art hath thus decreed, To make some good, but others to exceed, And you are her labour'd scholar.

Come, queen o' the feast,-- For, daughter, so you are,--here take your place: Marshal the rest, as they deserve their grace.

Your presence glads our days: honour we love, For who hates honour hates the gods above.

Contend not, sir, for we are gentlemen That neither in our hearts nor outward eyes Envy the great nor do the low despise.

By Jove, I wonder, that is king of thoughts, These cates resist me, she but thought upon.

By Juno, that is queen of marriage, All viands that I eat do seem unsavoury.

Sure, he's a gallant gentleman. He's but a country gentleman, Has done no more than other knights have done, Has broken a staff or so, so let it pass.

What, are you merry, knights? Who can be other in this royal presence? Here, with a cup that's stored unto the brim,-- As you do love, fill to your mistress' lips,-- We drink this health to you.

Yet pause awhile: Yon knight doth sit too melancholy, As if the entertainment in our court Had not a show might countervail his worth.

Therefore to make his entrance more sweet, Here, say we drink this standing-bowl of wine to him.

Alas, my father, it befits not me Unto a stranger knight to be so bold: He may my proffer take for an offence, Since men take women's gifts for impudence.

And furthermore tell him, we desire to know of him, Of whence he is, his name and parentage.

And further he desires to know of you, Of whence you are, your name and parentage.

He thanks your grace, names himself Pericles, A gentleman of Tyre, Who only by misfortune of the seas Bereft of ships and men, cast on this shore.

Now, by the gods, I pity his misfortune, And will awake him from his melancholy.

Come, gentlemen, we sit too long on trifles, And waste the time, which looks for other revels.

Even in your armours, as you are address'd, Will very well become a soldier's dance.

I will not have excuse, with saying this Loud music is too harsh for ladies' heads, Since they love men in arms as well as beds.

The Knights dance So, this was well ask'd,'twas so well perform'd.

Come, sir, Here is a lady that wants breathing too: And I have heard, you knights of Tyre Are excellent in making ladies trip, And that their measures are as excellent.

O, that's as much as you would be denied Of your fair courtesy.

The Knights and Ladies dance Unclasp, unclasp: Thanks, gentlemen, to all, all have done well.

Pages and lights, to conduct These knights unto their several lodgings! To PERICLES Yours, sir, We have given order to be next our own.

Princes, it is too late to talk of love, And that's the mark I know you level at: Therefore each one betake him to his rest, To-morrow all for speeding do their best.

And yet but justice, for though This king were great, his greatness was no guard To bar heaven's shaft, but sin had his reward.

See, not a man in private conference Or council has respect with him but he.

Lord Helicane, a word. With me? and welcome: happy day, my lords.

Know that our griefs are risen to the top, And now at length they overflow their banks.

Your griefs! for what? wrong not your prince you love.

Wrong not yourself, then, noble Helicane, But if the prince do live, let us salute him, Or know what ground's made happy by his breath.

Live, noble Helicane! For honour's cause, forbear your suffrages: If that you love Prince Pericles, forbear.

Take I your wish, I leap into the seas, Where's hourly trouble for a minute's ease.

A twelvemonth longer, let me entreat you to Forbear the absence of your king: If in which time expired, he not return, I shall with aged patience bear your yoke.

To wisdom he's a fool that will not yield, And since Lord Helicane enjoineth us, We with our travels will endeavour us.

Then you love us, we you, and we'll clasp hands: When peers thus knit, a kingdom ever stands.

Knights, from my daughter this I let you know, That for this twelvemonth she'll not undertake A married life.

Her reason to herself is only known, Which yet from her by no means can I get.

May we not get access to her, my lord? 'Faith, by no means, she has so strictly tied Her to her chamber, that 'tis impossible.

One twelve moons more she'll wear Diana's livery, This by the eye of Cynthia hath she vow'd And on her virgin honour will not break it.

They are well dispatch'd, now to my daughter's letter: She tells me here, she'd wed the stranger knight, Or never more to view nor day nor light.

All fortune to the good Simonides! To you as much, sir! I am beholding to you For your sweet music this last night: I do Protest my ears were never better fed With such delightful pleasing harmony.

It is your grace's pleasure to commend, Not my desert.

Let me ask you one thing: What do you think of my daughter, sir? A most virtuous princess.

And she is fair too, is she not? As a fair day in summer, wondrous fair.

Sir, my daughter thinks very well of you, Ay, so well, that you must be her master, And she will be your scholar: therefore look to it.

A letter, that she loves the knight of Tyre! 'Tis the king's subtlety to have my life.

O, seek not to entrap me, gracious lord, A stranger and distressed gentleman, That never aim'd so high to love your daughter, But bent all offices to honour her.

Thou hast bewitch'd my daughter, and thou art A villain.

By the gods, I have not: Never did thought of mine levy offence, Nor never did my actions yet commence A deed might gain her love or your displeasure.

Even in his throat--unless it be the king-- That calls me traitor, I return the lie.

My actions are as noble as my thoughts, That never relish'd of a base descent.

I came unto your court for honour's cause, And not to be a rebel to her state, And he that otherwise accounts of me, This sword shall prove he's honour's enemy.

Then, as you are as virtuous as fair, Resolve your angry father, if my tongue Did ere solicit, or my hand subscribe To any syllable that made love to you.

Why, sir, say if you had, Who takes offence at that would make me glad? Yea, mistress, are you so peremptory? I am glad on't with all my heart.

Will you, not having my consent, Bestow your love and your affections Upon a stranger? who, for aught I know, May be, nor can I think the contrary, As great in blood as I myself.

What, are you both agreed? Yes, if it please your majesty.

It pleaseth me so well, that I will see you wed, And then with what haste you can get you to bed.

Now sleep y-slaked hath the rout, No din but snores the house about, Made louder by the o'er-fed breast Of this most pompous marriage-feast.

The cat, with eyne of burning coal, Now crouches fore the mouse's hole, And crickets sing at the oven's mouth, E'er the blither for their drouth.

Where, by the loss of maidenhead, A babe is moulded.

Be attent, And time that is so briefly spent With your fine fancies quaintly eche: What's dumb in show I'll plain with speech.

I nill relate, action may Conveniently the rest convey, Which might not what by me is told.

In your imagination hold This stage the ship, upon whose deck The sea-tost Pericles appears to speak.

How, how, Lychorida! Patience, good sir, do not assist the storm.

Here's all that is left living of your queen, A little daughter: for the sake of it, Be manly, and take comfort.

O you gods! Why do you make us love your goodly gifts, And snatch them straight away? We here below Recall not what we give, and therein may Use honour with you.

Now, mild may be thy life! For a more blustrous birth had never babe: Quiet and gentle thy conditions! for Thou art the rudeliest welcome to this world That ever was prince's child.

Now, the good gods Throw their best eyes upon't! What courage, sir? God save you! Courage enough: I do not fear the flaw, It hath done to me the worst.

Yet, for the love Of this poor infant, this fresh-new sea-farer, I would it would be quiet.

Slack the bolins there! Thou wilt not, wilt thou? Blow, and split thyself.

But sea-room, an the brine and cloudy billow kiss the moon, I care not.

Sir, your queen must overboard: the sea works high, the wind is loud, and will not lie till the ship be cleared of the dead.

Pardon us, sir, with us at sea it hath been still observed: and we are strong in custom.

Therefore briefly yield her, for she must overboard straight.

Sir, we have a chest beneath the hatches, caulked and bitumed ready.

Mariner, say what coast is this? We are near Tarsus.

When canst thou reach it? By break of day, if the wind cease.

O, make for Tarsus! There will I visit Cleon, for the babe Cannot hold out to Tyrus: there I'll leave it At careful nursing.

Go thy ways, good mariner: I'll bring the body presently.

Philemon, ho! Doth my lord call? Get fire and meat for these poor men: 'T has been a turbulent and stormy night.

I have been in many, but such a night as this, Till now, I ne'er endured.

Your master will be dead ere you return, There's nothing can be minister'd to nature That can recover him.

To PHILEMON Give this to the 'pothecary, And tell me how it works.

That is the cause we trouble you so early, 'Tis not our husbandry.

But I much marvel that your lordship, having Rich tire about you, should at these early hours Shake off the golden slumber of repose.

'Tis most strange, Nature should be so conversant with pain, Being thereto not compell'd.

I hold it ever, Virtue and cunning were endowments greater Than nobleness and riches: careless heirs May the two latter darken and expend, But immortality attends the former.

What is that? Sir, even now Did the sea toss upon our shore this chest: 'Tis of some wreck.

Wrench it open straight: If the sea's stomach be o'ercharged with gold, 'Tis a good constraint of fortune it belches upon us.

How close 'tis caulk'd and bitumed! Did the sea cast it up? I never saw so huge a billow, sir, As toss'd it upon shore.

Wrench it open, Soft! it smells most sweetly in my sense.

Nay, certainly to-night, For look how fresh she looks! They were too rough That threw her in the sea.

Make a fire within: Fetch hither all my boxes in my closet.

Death may usurp on nature many hours, And yet the fire of life kindle again The o'erpress'd spirits.

I heard of an Egyptian That had nine hours lien dead, Who was by good appliance recovered.

Re-enter a Servant, with boxes, napkins, and fire Well said, well said, the fire and cloths.

The rough and woeful music that we have, Cause it to sound, beseech you.

The viol once more: how thou stirr'st, thou block! The music there!--I pray you, give her air.

Live, And make us weep to hear your fate, fair creature, Rare as you seem to be.

She moves O dear Diana, Where am I? Where's my lord? What world is this? Is not this strange? Most rare.

Hush, my gentle neighbours! Lend me your hands, to the next chamber bear her.

Get linen: now this matter must be look'd to, For her relapse is mortal.

Come, come, And AEsculapius guide us! Most honour'd Cleon, I must needs be gone, My twelve months are expired, and Tyrus stands In a litigious peace.

You, and your lady, Take from my heart all thankfulness! The gods Make up the rest upon you! Your shafts of fortune, though they hurt you mortally, Yet glance full wanderingly on us.

O your sweet queen! That the strict fates had pleased you had brought her hither, To have bless'd mine eyes with her! We cannot but obey The powers above us.

Could I rage and roar As doth the sea she lies in, yet the end Must be as 'tis.

Fear not, my lord, but think Your grace, that fed my country with your corn, For which the people's prayers still fall upon you, Must in your child be thought on.

Till she be married, madam, By bright Diana, whom we honour, all Unscissor'd shall this hair of mine remain, Though I show ill in't.

So I take my leave. Good madam, make me blessed in your care In bringing up my child.

I have one myself, Who shall not be more dear to my respect Than yours, my lord.

We'll bring your grace e'en to the edge o' the shore, Then give you up to the mask'd Neptune and The gentlest winds of heaven.

Come, dearest madam. O, no tears, Lychorida, no tears: Look to your little mistress, on whose grace You may depend hereafter.

Come, my lord. Madam, this letter, and some certain jewels, Lay with you in your coffer: which are now At your command.

That I was shipp'd at sea, I well remember, Even on my eaning time, but whether there Deliver'd, by the holy gods, I cannot rightly say.

But since King Pericles, My wedded lord, I ne'er shall see again, A vestal livery will I take me to, And never more have joy.

Madam, if this you purpose as ye speak, Diana's temple is not distant far, Where you may abide till your date expire.

Moreover, if you please, a niece of mine Shall there attend you.

My recompense is thanks, that's all, Yet my good will is great, though the gift small.

Imagine Pericles arrived at Tyre, Welcomed and settled to his own desire.

His woeful queen we leave at Ephesus, Unto Diana there a votaress.

But, alack, That monster envy, oft the wrack Of earned praise, Marina's life Seeks to take off by treason's knife.

Marina gets All praises, which are paid as debts, And not as given.

This so darks In Philoten all graceful marks, That Cleon's wife, with envy rare, A present murderer does prepare For good Marina, that her daughter Might stand peerless by this slaughter.

The sooner her vile thoughts to stead, Lychorida, our nurse, is dead: And cursed Dionyza hath The pregnant instrument of wrath Prest for this blow.

The unborn event I do commend to your content: Only I carry winged time Post on the lame feet of my rhyme, Which never could I so convey, Unless your thoughts went on my way.

Thy oath remember, thou hast sworn to do't: 'Tis but a blow, which never shall be known.

Thou canst not do a thing in the world so soon, To yield thee so much profit.

Let not conscience, Which is but cold, inflaming love i' thy bosom, Inflame too nicely, nor let pity, which Even women have cast off, melt thee, but be A soldier to thy purpose.

Here she comes weeping for her only mistress' death.

No, I will rob Tellus of her weed, To strew thy green with flowers: the yellows, blues, The purple violets, and marigolds, Shall as a carpet hang upon thy grave, While summer-days do last.

Ay me! poor maid, Born in a tempest, when my mother died, This world to me is like a lasting storm, Whirring me from my friends.

How now, Marina! why do you keep alone? How chance my daughter is not with you? Do not Consume your blood with sorrowing: you have A nurse of me.

Lord, how your favour's changed With this unprofitable woe! Come, give me your flowers, ere the sea mar it.

Walk with Leonine, the air is quick there, And it pierces and sharpens the stomach.

Come, Leonine, take her by the arm, walk with her.

No, I pray you, I'll not bereave you of your servant.

Come, come, I love the king your father, and yourself, With more than foreign heart.

Go, I pray you, Walk, and be cheerful once again, reserve That excellent complexion, which did steal The eyes of young and old.

Walk half an hour, Leonine, at the least: Remember what I have said.

I'll leave you, my sweet lady, for a while: Pray, walk softly, do not heat your blood: What! I must have a care of you.

Is this wind westerly that blows? When I was born, the wind was north.

When was this? When I was born: Never was waves nor wind more violent, And from the ladder-tackle washes off A canvas-climber.

'Ha!' says one, 'wilt out?' And with a dropping industry they skip From stem to stern: the boatswain whistles, and The master calls, and trebles their confusion.

What mean you? If you require a little space for prayer, I grant it: pray, but be not tedious, For the gods are quick of ear, and I am sworn To do my work with haste.

How have I offended, Wherein my death might yield her any profit, Or my life imply her any danger? My commission Is not to reason of the deed, but do it.

You are well favour'd, and your looks foreshow You have a gentle heart.

I saw you lately, When you caught hurt in parting two that fought: Good sooth, it show'd well in you: do so now: Your lady seeks my life, come you between, And save poor me, the weaker.

He seizes her Hold, villain! LEONINE runs away A prize! a prize! Half-part, mates, half-part.

Re-enter LEONINE These roguing thieves serve the great pirate Valdes, And they have seized Marina.

But I'll see further: Perhaps they will but please themselves upon her, Not carry her aboard.

If she remain, Whom they have ravish'd must by me be slain.

Search the market narrowly, Mytilene is full of gallants.

We lost too much money this mart by being too wenchless.

We have but poor three, and they can do no more than they can do, and they with continual action are even as good as rotten.

Therefore let's have fresh ones, whate'er we pay for them.

If there be not a conscience to be used in every trade, we shall never prosper.

Thou sayest true: 'tis not our bringing up of poor bastards,--as, I think, I have brought up some eleven-- Ay, to eleven, and brought them down again.

But shall I search the market? What else, man? The stuff we have, a strong wind will blow it to pieces, they are so pitifully sodden.

Thou sayest true, they're too unwholesome, o' conscience.

The poor Transylvanian is dead, that lay with the little baggage.

Ay, she quickly pooped him, she made him roast-meat for worms.

But I'll go search the market. Three or four thousand chequins were as pretty a proportion to live quietly, and so give over.

Besides, the sore terms we stand upon with the gods will be strong with us for giving over.

As well as we! ay, and better too, we offend worse.

Neither is our profession any trade, it's no calling.

But here comes Boult. Re-enter BOULT, with the Pirates and MARINA she's a virgin? O, sir, we doubt it not.

Master, I have gone through for this piece, you see: if you like her, so, if not, I have lost my earnest.

Boult, has she any qualities? She has a good face, speaks well, and has excellent good clothes: there's no further necessity of qualities can make her be refused.

What's her price, Boult? I cannot be bated one doit of a thousand pieces.

Well, follow me, my masters, you shall have your money presently.

Such a maidenhead were no cheap thing, if men were as they have been.

You are light into my hands, where you are like to live.

The more my fault To scape his hands where I was like to die.

Yes, indeed shall you, and taste gentlemen of all fashions: you shall fare well, you shall have the difference of all complexions.

What! do you stop your ears? Are you a woman? What would you have me be, an I be not a woman? An honest woman, or not a woman.

Marry, whip thee, gosling: I think I shall have something to do with you.

Boult's returned. Re-enter BOULT Now, sir, hast thou cried her through the market? I have cried her almost to the number of her hairs, I have drawn her picture with my voice.

And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find the inclination of the people, especially of the younger sort? 'Faith, they listened to me as they would have hearkened to their father's testament.

There was a Spaniard's mouth so watered, that he went to bed to her very description.

We shall have him here to-morrow with his best ruff on.

Well, well, as for him, he brought his disease hither: here he does but repair it.

I know he will come in our shadow, to scatter his crowns in the Well, if we had of every nation a traveller, we should lodge them with this sign.

Mark me: you must seem to do that fearfully which you commit willingly, despise profit where you have most gain.

To weep that you live as ye do makes pity in your lovers: seldom but that pity begets you a good opinion, and that opinion a mere profit.

O, take her home, mistress, take her home: these blushes of hers must be quenched with some present practise.

Thou sayest true, i' faith, so they must, for your bride goes to that with shame which is her way to go with warrant.

But, mistress, if I have bargained for the joint,-- Thou mayst cut a morsel off the spit.

Who should deny it? Come, young one, I like the manner of your garments well.

Boult, spend thou that in the town: report what a sojourner we have, you'll lose nothing by custom.

When nature flamed this piece, she meant thee a good turn, therefore say what a paragon she is, and thou hast the harvest out of thine own report.

I warrant you, mistress, thunder shall not so awake the beds of eels as my giving out her beauty stir up the lewdly-inclined.

I'll bring home some to-night. Come your ways, follow me.

If fires be hot, knives sharp, or waters deep, Untied I still my virgin knot will keep.

Were I chief lord of all this spacious world, I'ld give it to undo the deed.

Nurses are not the fates, To foster it, nor ever to preserve.

Who can cross it? Unless you play the pious innocent, And for an honest attribute cry out 'She died by foul play.

Well, well, Of all the faults beneath the heavens, the gods Do like this worst.

Be one of those that think The petty wrens of Tarsus will fly hence, And open this to Pericles.

I do shame To think of what a noble strain you are, And of how coward a spirit.

To such proceeding Who ever but his approbation added, Though not his prime consent, he did not flow From honourable sources.

Be it so, then: Yet none does know, but you, how she came dead, Nor none can know, Leonine being gone.

She did disdain my child, and stood between Her and her fortunes: none would look on her, But cast their gazes on Marina's face, Whilst ours was blurted at and held a malkin Not worth the time of day.

It pierced me through, And though you call my course unnatural, You not your child well loving, yet I find It greets me as an enterprise of kindness Perform'd to your sole daughter.

Thou art like the harpy, Which, to betray, dost, with thine angel's face, Seize with thine eagle's talons.

You are like one that superstitiously Doth swear to the gods that winter kills the flies: But yet I know you'll do as I advise.

Thus time we waste, and longest leagues make short, Sail seas in cockles, have an wish but for't, Making, to take your imagination, From bourn to bourn, region to region.

By you being pardon'd, we commit no crime To use one language in each several clime Where our scenes seem to live.

I do beseech you To learn of me, who stand i' the gaps to teach you, The stages of our story.

Pericles Is now again thwarting the wayward seas, Attended on by many a lord and knight.

Old Escanes, whom Helicanus late Advanced in time to great and high estate, Is left to govern.

Bear you it in mind, Old Helicanus goes along behind.

Well-sailing ships and bounteous winds have brought This king to Tarsus,--think his pilot thought, So with his steerage shall your thoughts grow on,-- To fetch his daughter home, who first is gone.

Like motes and shadows see them move awhile, Your ears unto your eyes I'll reconcile.

See how belief may suffer by foul show! This borrow'd passion stands for true old woe, And Pericles, in sorrow all devour'd, With sighs shot through, and biggest tears Leaves Tarsus and again embarks.

He swears Never to wash his face, nor cut his hairs: He puts on sackcloth, and to sea.

He bears A tempest, which his mortal vessel tears, And yet he rides it out.

Now please you wit. The epitaph is for Marina writ By wicked Dionyza.

Reads the inscription on MARINA's monument 'The fairest, sweet'st, and best lies here, Who wither'd in her spring of year.

No visor does become black villany So well as soft and tender flattery.

Let Pericles believe his daughter's dead, And bear his courses to be ordered By Lady Fortune, while our scene must play His daughter's woe and heavy well-a-day In her unholy service.

Patience, then, And think you now are all in Mytilene.

Did you ever hear the like? No, nor never shall do in such a place as this, she being once gone.

But to have divinity preached there! did you ever dream of such a thing? No, no.

Come, I am for no more bawdy-houses: shall's go hear the vestals sing? I'll do any thing now that is virtuous, but I am out of the road of rutting for ever.

Well, I had rather than twice the worth of her she had ne'er come here.

Fie, fie upon her! she's able to freeze the god Priapus, and undo a whole generation.

We must either get her ravished, or be rid of her.

'Faith, I must ravish her, or she'll disfurnish us of all our cavaliers, and make our swearers priests.

Now, the pox upon her green-sickness for me! 'Faith, there's no way to be rid on't but by the way to the pox.

Here comes the Lord Lysimachus disguised. We should have both lord and lown, if the peevish baggage would but give way to customers.

How now! How a dozen of virginities? Now, the gods to-bless your honour! I am glad to see your honour in good health.

You may so, 'tis the better for you that your resorters stand upon sound legs.

How now! wholesome iniquity have you that a man may deal withal, and defy the surgeon? We have here one, sir, if she would--but there never came her like in Mytilene.

If she'ld do the deed of darkness, thou wouldst say.

For flesh and blood, sir, white and red, you shall see a rose, and she were a rose indeed, if she had but-- What, prithee? O, sir, I can be modest.

That dignifies the renown of a bawd, no less than it gives a good report to a number to be chaste.

Here comes that which grows to the stalk, never plucked yet, I can assure you.

Re-enter BOULT with MARINA Is she not a fair creature? 'Faith, she would serve after a long voyage at sea.

I beseech your honour, give me leave: a word, and I'll have done presently.

I desire to find him so, that I may worthily note him.

Next, he's the governor of this country, and a man whom I am bound to.

If he govern the country, you are bound to him indeed, but how honourable he is in that, I know not.

Pray you, without any more virginal fencing, will you use him kindly? He will line your apron with gold.

What he will do graciously, I will thankfully receive.

Ha' you done? My lord, she's not paced yet: you must take some pains to work her to your manage.

Go thy ways. Now, pretty one, how long have you been at this trade? What trade, sir? Why, I cannot name't but I shall offend.

Please you to name it. How long have you been of this profession? E'er since I can remember.

Did you go to 't so young? Were you a gamester at five or at seven? Earlier too, sir, if now I be one.

Why, the house you dwell in proclaims you to be a creature of sale.

Do you know this house to be a place of such resort, and will come into 't? I hear say you are of honourable parts, and are the governor of this place.

Why, hath your principal made known unto you who I am? Who is my principal? Why, your herb-woman, she that sets seeds and roots of shame and iniquity.

O, you have heard something of my power, and so stand aloof for more serious wooing.

But I protest to thee, pretty one, my authority shall not see thee, or else look friendly upon thee.

If you were born to honour, show it now, If put upon you, make the judgment good That thought you worthy of it.

Had I brought hither a corrupted mind, Thy speech had alter'd it.

Thou art a piece of virtue, and I doubt not but thy training hath been noble.

A curse upon him, die he like a thief, That robs thee of thy goodness! If thou dost Hear from me, it shall be for thy good.

Re-enter BOULT I beseech your honour, one piece for me.

Avaunt, thou damned door-keeper! Your house, but for this virgin that doth prop it, Would sink and overwhelm you.

Away! How's this? We must take another course with you.

If your peevish chastity, which is not worth a breakfast in the cheapest country under the cope, shall undo a whole household, let me be gelded like a spaniel.

Come your ways. Whither would you have me? I must have your maidenhead taken off, or the common hangman shall execute it.

Come your ways. We'll have no more gentlemen driven away.

Come your ways, I say. Re-enter Bawd How now! what's the matter? Worse and worse, mistress, she has here spoken holy words to the Lord Lysimachus.

O abominable! She makes our profession as it were to stink afore the face of the gods.

Marry, hang her up for ever! The nobleman would have dealt with her like a nobleman, and she sent him away as cold as a snowball, saying his prayers too.

Boult, take her away, use her at thy pleasure: crack the glass of her virginity, and make the rest malleable.

An if she were a thornier piece of ground than she is, she shall be ploughed.

Hark, hark, you gods! She conjures: away with her! Would she had never come within my doors! Marry, hang you! She's born to undo us.

Will you not go the way of women-kind? Marry, come up, my dish of chastity with rosemary and bays! Come, mistress, come your ways with me.

Whither wilt thou have me? To take from you the jewel you hold so dear.

What canst thou wish thine enemy to be? Why, I could wish him to be my master, or rather, my mistress.

Neither of these are so bad as thou art, Since they do better thee in their command.

O, that the gods Would safely deliver me from this place! Here, here's gold for thee.

If that thy master would gain by thee, Proclaim that I can sing, weave, sew, and dance, With other virtues, which I'll keep from boast: And I will undertake all these to teach.

I doubt not but this populous city will Yield many scholars.

But can you teach all this you speak of? Prove that I cannot, take me home again, And prostitute me to the basest groom That doth frequent your house.

Well, I will see what I can do for thee: if I can place thee, I will.

Come, I'll do for thee what I can, come your ways.

Marina thus the brothel 'scapes, and chances Into an honest house, our story says.

Here we her place, And to her father turn our thoughts again, Where we left him, on the sea.

We there him lost, Whence, driven before the winds, he is arrived Here where his daughter dwells, and on this coast Suppose him now at anchor.

The city strived God Neptune's annual feast to keep: from whence Lysimachus our Tyrian ship espies, His banners sable, trimm'd with rich expense, And to him in his barge with fervor hies.

In your supposing once more put your sight Of heavy Pericles, think this his bark: Where what is done in action, more, if might, Shall be discover'd, please you, sit and hark.

pavilion on deck, with a curtain before it, PERICLES within it, reclined on a couch.

Sir, there's a barge put off from Mytilene, And in it is Lysimachus the governor, Who craves to come aboard.

Call up some gentlemen. Ho, gentlemen! my lord calls.

Doth your lordship call? Gentlemen, there's some of worth would come aboard, I pray ye, greet them fairly.

The Gentlemen and the two Sailors descend, and go on board the barge This is the man that can, in aught you would, Resolve you.

Hail, reverend sir! the gods preserve you! And you, sir, to outlive the age I am, And die as I would do.

Being on shore, honouring of Neptune's triumphs, Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us, I made to it, to know of whence you are.

First, what is your place? I am the governor of this place you lie before.

Our vessel is of Tyre, in it the king, A man who for this three months hath not spoken To any one, nor taken sustenance But to prorogue his grief.

Upon what ground is his distemperature? 'Twould be too tedious to repeat, But the main grief springs from the loss Of a beloved daughter and a wife.

May we not see him? You may, But bootless is your sight: he will not speak To any.

PERICLES discovered This was a goodly person, Till the disaster that, one mortal night, Drove him to this.

Sir king, all hail! the gods preserve you! Hail, royal sir! It is in vain, he will not speak to you.

We have a maid in Mytilene, I durst wager, Would win some words of him.

Whispers a Lord, who goes off in the barge of LYSIMACHUS Sure, all's effectless, yet nothing we'll omit That bears recovery's name.

But, since your kindness We have stretch'd thus far, let us beseech you That for our gold we may provision have, Wherein we are not destitute for want, But weary for the staleness.

O, sir, a courtesy Which if we should deny, the most just gods For every graff would send a caterpillar, And so afflict our province.

Yet once more Let me entreat to know at large the cause Of your king's sorrow.

Sit, sir, I will recount it to you: But, see, I am prevented.

Re-enter, from the barge, Lord, with MARINA, and a young Lady O, here is The lady that I sent for.

Welcome, fair one! Is't not a goodly presence? She's a gallant lady.

She's such a one, that, were I well assured Came of a gentle kind and noble stock, I'ld wish no better choice, and think me rarely wed.

Sir, I will use My utmost skill in his recovery, Provided That none but I and my companion maid Be suffer'd to come near him.

Come, let us leave her, And the gods make her prosperous! MARINA sings Mark'd he your music? No, nor look'd on us.

I will desist, But there is something glows upon my cheek, And whispers in mine ear, 'Go not till he speak.

My fortunes--parentage--good parentage-- To equal mine!--was it not thus? what say you? I said, my lord, if you did know my parentage, You would not do me violence.

Pray you, turn your eyes upon me. You are like something that--What country-woman? Here of these shores? No, nor of any shores: Yet I was mortally brought forth, and am No other than I appear.

Where do you live? Where I am but a stranger: from the deck You may discern the place.

Where were you bred? And how achieved you these endowments, which You make more rich to owe? If I should tell my history, it would seem Like lies disdain'd in the reporting.

What were thy friends? Didst thou not say, when I did push thee back-- Which was when I perceived thee--that thou camest From good descending? So indeed I did.

I think thou said'st Thou hadst been toss'd from wrong to injury, And that thou thought'st thy griefs might equal mine, If both were open'd.

Some such thing I said, and said no more but what my thoughts Did warrant me was likely.

What were thy friends? How lost thou them? Thy name, my most kind virgin? Recount, I do beseech thee: come, sit by me.

O, I am mock'd, And thou by some incensed god sent hither To make the world to laugh at me.

Thou little know'st how thou dost startle me, To call thyself Marina.

The name Was given me by one that had some power, My father, and a king.

How! a king's daughter? And call'd Marina? You said you would believe me, But, not to be a troubler of your peace, I will end here.

But are you flesh and blood? Have you a working pulse? and are no fairy? Motion! Well, speak on.

Where were you born? And wherefore call'd Marina? Call'd Marina For I was born at sea.

At sea! what mother? My mother was the daughter of a king, Who died the minute I was born, As my good nurse Lychorida hath oft Deliver'd weeping.

O, stop there a little! This is the rarest dream that e'er dull sleep Did mock sad fools withal: this cannot be: My daughter's buried.

Well: where were you bred? I'll hear you more, to the bottom of your story, And never interrupt you.

You scorn: believe me, 'twere best I did give o'er.

I will believe you by the syllable Of what you shall deliver.

But, good sir, Whither will you have me? Why do you weep? It may be, You think me an impostor: no, good faith, I am the daughter to King Pericles, If good King Pericles be.

She would never tell Her parentage, being demanded that, She would sit still and weep.

O Helicanus, strike me, honour'd sir, Give me a gash, put me to present pain, Lest this great sea of joys rushing upon me O'erbear the shores of my mortality, And drown me with their sweetness.

What was thy mother's name? tell me but that, For truth can never be confirm'd enough, Though doubts did ever sleep.

Is it no more to be your daughter than To say my mother's name was Thaisa? Thaisa was my mother, who did end The minute I began.

Mine own, Helicanus, She is not dead at Tarsus, as she should have been, By savage Cleon: she shall tell thee all, When thou shalt kneel, and justify in knowledge She is thy very princess.

Who is this? Sir, 'tis the governor of Mytilene, Who, hearing of your melancholy state, Did come to see you.

I am wild in my beholding. O heavens bless my girl! But, hark, what music? Tell Helicanus, my Marina, tell him O'er, point by point, for yet he seems to doubt, How sure you are my daughter.

Most heavenly music! It nips me unto listening, and thick slumber Hangs upon mine eyes: let me rest.

Well, my companion friends, If this but answer to my just belief, I'll well remember you.

DIANA appears to PERICLES as in a vision My temple stands in Ephesus: hie thee thither, And do upon mine altar sacrifice.

There, when my maiden priests are met together, Before the people all, Reveal how thou at sea didst lose thy wife: To mourn thy crosses, with thy daughter's, call And give them repetition to the life.

Or perform my bidding, or thou livest in woe, Do it, and happy, by my silver bow! Awake, and tell thy dream.

Celestial Dian, goddess argentine, I will obey thee.

To LYSIMACHUS Shall we refresh us, sir, upon your shore, And give you gold for such provision As our intents will need? With all my heart, and, when you come ashore, I have another suit.

You shall prevail, Were it to woo my daughter, for it seems You have been noble towards her.

Now our sands are almost run, More a little, and then dumb.

So he thrived, That he is promised to be wived To fair Marina, but in no wise Till he had done his sacrifice, As Dian bade: whereto being bound, The interim, pray you, all confound.

In feather'd briefness sails are fill'd, And wishes fall out as they're will'd.

At Ephesus, the temple see, Our king and all his company.

That he can hither come so soon, Is by your fancy's thankful doom.

near the altar, as high priestess, a number of Virgins on each side, CERIMON and other Inhabitants of Ephesus attending.

Hail, Dian! to perform thy just command, I here confess myself the king of Tyre, Who, frighted from my country, did wed At Pentapolis the fair Thaisa.

At sea in childbed died she, but brought forth A maid-child call'd Marina, who, O goddess, Wears yet thy silver livery.

Voice and favour! You are, you are--O royal Pericles! What means the nun? she dies! help, gentlemen! Noble sir, If you have told Diana's altar true, This is your wife.

Reverend appearer, no, I threw her overboard with these very arms.

Early in blustering morn this lady was Thrown upon this shore.

I oped the coffin, Found there rich jewels, recover'd her, and placed her Here in Diana's temple.

May we see them? Great sir, they shall be brought you to my house, Whither I invite you.

Look, Thaisa is recovered. O, let me look! If he be none of mine, my sanctity Will to my sense bend no licentious ear, But curb it, spite of seeing.

O, my lord, Are you not Pericles? Like him you spake, Like him you are: did you not name a tempest, A birth, and death? The voice of dead Thaisa! That Thaisa am I, supposed dead And drown'd.

When we with tears parted Pentapolis, The king my father gave you such a ring.

Shows a ring This, this: no more, you gods! your present kindness Makes my past miseries sports: you shall do well, That on the touching of her lips I may Melt and no more be seen.

O, come, be buried A second time within these arms.

Kneels to THAISA Look, who kneels here! Flesh of thy flesh, Thaisa, Thy burden at the sea, and call'd Marina For she was yielded there.

Blest, and mine own! Hail, madam, and my queen! I know you not.

You have heard me say, when I did fly from Tyre, I left behind an ancient substitute: Can you remember what I call'd the man? I have named him oft.

Still confirmation: Embrace him, dear Thaisa, this is he.

Now do I long to hear how you were found, How possibly preserved, and who to thank, Besides the gods, for this great miracle.

Lord Cerimon, my lord, this man, Through whom the gods have shown their power, that can From first to last resolve you.

Reverend sir, The gods can have no mortal officer More like a god than you.

Will you deliver How this dead queen re-lives? I will, my lord.

Beseech you, first go with me to my house, Where shall be shown you all was found with her, How she came placed here in the temple, No needful thing omitted.

Pure Dian, bless thee for thy vision! I Will offer night-oblations to thee.

Thaisa, This prince, the fair-betrothed of your daughter, Shall marry her at Pentapolis.

And now, This ornament Makes me look dismal will I clip to form, And what this fourteen years no razor touch'd, To grace thy marriage-day, I'll beautify.

Lord Cerimon hath letters of good credit, sir, My father's dead.

Heavens make a star of him! Yet there, my queen, We'll celebrate their nuptials, and ourselves Will in that kingdom spend our following days: Our son and daughter shall in Tyrus reign.

Lord Cerimon, we do our longing stay To hear the rest untold: sir, lead's the way.

So, on your patience evermore attending, New joy wait on you! Here our play has ending.

Now, Thomas Mowbray, do I turn to thee, And mark my greeting well, for what I speak My body shall make good upon this earth, Or my divine soul answer it in heaven.

Thou art a traitor and a miscreant, Too good to be so and too bad to live, Since the more fair and crystal is the sky, The uglier seem the clouds that in it fly.

Once more, the more to aggravate the note, With a foul traitor's name stuff I thy throat, And wish, so please my sovereign, ere I move, What my tongue speaks my right drawn sword may prove.

Mean time let this defend my loyalty, By all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.

Pale trembling coward, there I throw my gage, Disclaiming here the kindred of the king, And lay aside my high blood's royalty, Which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except.

Then, Bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart, Through the false passage of thy throat, thou liest.

For Gloucester's death, I slew him not, but to my own disgrace Neglected my sworn duty in that case.

In haste whereof, most heartily I pray Your highness to assign our trial day.

Good uncle, let this end where it begun, We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your son.

To be a make-peace shall become my age: Throw down, my son, the Duke of Norfolk's gage.

When, Harry, when? Obedience bids I should not bid again.

My life thou shalt command, but not my shame: The one my duty owes, but my fair name, Despite of death that lives upon my grave, To dark dishonour's use thou shalt not have.

I am disgraced, impeach'd and baffled here, Pierced to the soul with slander's venom'd spear, The which no balm can cure but his heart-blood Which breathed this poison.

Rage must be withstood: Give me his gage: lions make leopards tame.

My dear dear lord, The purest treasure mortal times afford Is spotless reputation: that away, Men are but gilded loam or painted clay.

A jewel in a ten-times-barr'd-up chest Is a bold spirit in a loyal breast.

Mine honour is my life, both grow in one: Take honour from me, and my life is done: Then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try, In that I live and for that will I die.

Lord marshal, command our officers at arms Be ready to direct these home alarms.

What shall I say? to safeguard thine own life, The best way is to venge my Gloucester's death.

Where then, alas, may I complain myself? To God, the widow's champion and defence.

Lo, this is all:--nay, yet depart not so, Though this be all, do not so quickly go, I shall remember more.

Bid him--ah, what?-- With all good speed at Plashy visit me.

Desolate, desolate, will I hence and die: The last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.

My Lord Aumerle, is Harry Hereford arm'd? Yea, at all points, and longs to enter in.

The Duke of Norfolk, sprightfully and bold, Stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.

Why, then, the champions are prepared, and stay For nothing but his majesty's approach.

The trumpets sound, and KING RICHARD enters with  his nobles, JOHN OF GAUNT, BUSHY, BAGOT, GREEN, and  others.

The appellant in all duty greets your highness, And craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.

Cousin of Hereford, as thy cause is right, So be thy fortune in this royal fight! Farewell, my blood, which if to-day thou shed, Lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.

O let no noble eye profane a tear For me, if I be gored with Mowbray's spear: As confident as is the falcon's flight Against a bird, do I with Mowbray fight.

My loving lord, I take my leave of you, Of you, my noble cousin, Lord Aumerle, Not sick, although I have to do with death, But lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath.

Most mighty liege, and my companion peers, Take from my mouth the wish of happy years: As gentle and as jocund as to jest Go I to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.

Farewell, my lord: securely I espy Virtue with valour couched in thine eye.

Harry of Hereford, Lancaster and Derby, Receive thy lance, and God defend the right! Strong as a tower in hope, I cry amen.

A charge sounded Stay, the king hath thrown his warder down.

Let them lay by their helmets and their spears, And both return back to their chairs again: Withdraw with us: and let the trumpets sound While we return these dukes what we decree.

A long flourish Draw near, And list what with our council we have done.

Your will be done: this must my comfort be, Sun that warms you here shall shine on me, And those his golden beams to you here lent Shall point on me and gild my banishment.

Then thus I turn me from my country's light, To dwell in solemn shades of endless night.

Norfolk, so far as to mine enemy:-- By this time, had the king permitted us, One of our souls had wander'd in the air.

Now no way can I stray, Save back to England, all the world's my way.

Uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes I see thy grieved heart: thy sad aspect Hath from the number of his banish'd years Pluck'd four away.

To HENRY BOLINGBROKE Six frozen winter spent, Return with welcome home from banishment.

How long a time lies in one little word! Four lagging winters and four wanton springs End in a word: such is the breath of kings.

Thy son is banish'd upon good advice, Whereto thy tongue a party-verdict gave: Why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour? Things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour.

You urged me as a judge, but I had rather You would have bid me argue like a father.

O, had it been a stranger, not my child, To smooth his fault I should have been more mild: A partial slander sought I to avoid, And in the sentence my own life destroy'd.

Alas, I look'd when some of you should say, I was too strict to make mine own away, But you gave leave to my unwilling tongue Against my will to do myself this wrong.

Cousin, farewell, and, uncle, bid him so: Six years we banish him, and he shall go.

Exeunt KING RICHARD II and train Cousin, farewell: what presence must not know, From where you do remain let paper show.

My lord, no leave take I, for I will ride, As far as land will let me, by your side.

My heart will sigh when I miscall it so, Which finds it an inforced pilgrimage.

The sullen passage of thy weary steps Esteem as foil wherein thou art to set The precious jewel of thy home return.

Nay, rather, every tedious stride I make Will but remember me what a deal of world I wander from the jewels that I love.

Teach thy necessity to reason thus, There is no virtue like necessity.

Think not the king did banish thee, But thou the king.

Woe doth the heavier sit, Where it perceives it is but faintly borne.

Come, come, my son, I'll bring thee on thy way: Had I thy youth and cause, I would not stay.

Then, England's ground, farewell, sweet soil, adieu, My mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet! Where'er I wander, boast of this I can, Though banish'd, yet a trueborn Englishman.

Cousin Aumerle, How far brought you high Hereford on his way? I brought high Hereford, if you call him so, But to the next highway, and there I left him.

Marry, would the word 'farewell' have lengthen'd hours And added years to his short banishment, He should have had a volume of farewells, But since it would not, he had none of me.

He is our cousin, cousin, but 'tis doubt, When time shall call him home from banishment, Whether our kinsman come to see his friends.

Now for the rebels which stand out in Ireland, Expedient manage must be made, my liege, Ere further leisure yield them further means For their advantage and your highness' loss.

Bushy, what news? Old John of Gaunt is grievous sick, my lord, Suddenly taken, and hath sent post haste To entreat your majesty to visit him.

Now put it, God, in the physician's mind To help him to his grave immediately! The lining of his coffers shall make coats To deck our soldiers for these Irish wars.

O, but they say the tongues of dying men Enforce attention like deep harmony: Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain, For they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain.

Direct not him whose way himself will choose: 'Tis breath thou lack'st, and that breath wilt thou lose.

Ah, would the scandal vanish with my life, How happy then were my ensuing death! The king is come: deal mildly with his youth, For young hot colts being raged do rage the more.

Can sick men play so nicely with their names? No, misery makes sport to mock itself: Since thou dost seek to kill my name in me, I mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.

Should dying men flatter with those that live? No, no, men living flatter those that die.

Now He that made me knows I see thee ill, Ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill.

Now, by my seat's right royal majesty, Wert thou not brother to great Edward's son, This tongue that runs so roundly in thy head Should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.

Live in thy shame, but die not shame with thee! These words hereafter thy tormentors be! Convey me to my bed, then to my grave: Love they to live that love and honour have.

And let them die that age and sullens have, For both hast thou, and both become the grave.

I do beseech your majesty, impute his words To wayward sickliness and age in him: He loves you, on my life, and holds you dear As Harry Duke of Hereford, were he here.

Right, you say true: as Hereford's love, so his, As theirs, so mine, and all be as it is.

What says he? Nay, nothing, all is said His tongue is now a stringless instrument, Words, life and all, old Lancaster hath spent.

Be York the next that must be bankrupt so! Though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.

The ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he, His time is spent, our pilgrimage must be.

Now for our Irish wars: We must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns, Which live like venom where no venom else But only they have privilege to live.

And for these great affairs do ask some charge, Towards our assistance we do seize to us The plate, corn, revenues and moveables, Whereof our uncle Gaunt did stand possess'd.

O Richard! York is too far gone with grief, Or else he never would compare between.

Why, uncle, what's the matter? O my liege, Pardon me, if you please, if n ot, I, pleased Not to be pardon'd, am content withal.

Think what you will, we seize into our hands His plate, his goods, his money and his lands.

I'll not be by the while: my liege, farewell: What will ensue hereof, there's none can tell, But by bad courses may be understood That their events can never fall out good.

Go, Bushy, to the Earl of Wiltshire straight: Bid him repair to us to Ely House To see this business.

To-morrow next We will for Ireland, and 'tis time, I trow: And we create, in absence of ourself, Our uncle York lord governor of England, For he is just and always loved us well.

Come on, our queen: to-morrow must we part, Be merry, for our time of stay is short Flourish.

Exeunt KING RICHARD II, QUEEN, DUKE OF AUMERLE, BUSHY, GREEN, and BAGOT Well, lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.

My heart is great, but it must break with silence, Ere't be disburden'd with a liberal tongue.

No good at all that I can do for him, Unless you call it good to pity him, Bereft and gelded of his patrimony.

Now, afore God, 'tis shame such wrongs are borne In him, a royal prince, and many moe Of noble blood in this declining land.

The commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes, And quite lost their hearts: the nobles hath he fined For ancient quarrels, and quite lost their hearts.

He hath not money for these Irish wars, His burthenous taxations notwithstanding, But by the robbing of the banish'd duke.

We see the very wreck that we must suffer, And unavoided is the danger now, For suffering so the causes of our wreck.

Not so, even through the hollow eyes of death I spy life peering, but I dare not say How near the tidings of our comfort is.

Nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours.

Be confident to speak, Northumberland: We three are but thyself, and, speaking so, Thy words are but as thoughts, therefore, be bold.

To horse, to horse! urge doubts to them that fear.

Madam, your majesty is too much sad: You promised, when you parted with the king, To lay aside life-harming heaviness And entertain a cheerful disposition.

Then, thrice-gracious queen, More than your lord's departure weep not: more's not seen, Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye, Which for things true weeps things imaginary.

God save your majesty! and well met, gentlemen: I hope the king is not yet shipp'd for Ireland.

With signs of war about his aged neck: O, full of careful business are his looks! Uncle, for God's sake, speak comfortable words.

Should I do so, I should belie my thoughts: Comfort's in heaven, and we are on the earth, Where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief.

He was? Why, so! go all which way it will! The nobles they are fled, the commons they are cold, And will, I fear, revolt on Hereford's side.

Sirrah, get thee to Plashy, to my sister Gloucester, Bid her send me presently a thousand pound: Hold, take my ring.

My lord, I had forgot to tell your lordship, To-day, as I came by, I called there, But I shall grieve you to report the rest.

What is't, knave? An hour before I came, the duchess died.

What, are there no posts dispatch'd for Ireland? How shall we do for money for these wars? Come, sister,--cousin, I would say--pray, pardon me.

Go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts And bring away the armour that is there.

Gentlemen, will you go muster men? If I know how or which way to order these affairs Thus thrust disorderly into my hands, Never believe me.

Both are my kinsmen: The one is my sovereign, whom both my oath And duty bids defend, the other again Is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong'd, Whom conscience and my kindred bids to right.

Gentlemen, go, muster up your men, And meet me presently at Berkeley.

I should to Plashy too, But time will not permit: all is uneven, And every thing is left at six and seven.

The wind sits fair for news to go to Ireland, But none returns.

For us to levy power Proportionable to the enemy Is all unpossible.

Besides, our nearness to the king in love Is near the hate of those love not the king.

And that's the wavering commons: for their love Lies in their purses, and whoso empties them By so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.

If judgement lie in them, then so do we, Because we ever have been near the king.

Well, I will for refuge straight to Bristol castle: The Earl of Wiltshire is already there.

Thither will I with you, for little office The hateful commons will perform for us, Except like curs to tear us all to pieces.

Will you go along with us? No, I will to Ireland to his majesty.

Farewell: if heart's presages be not vain, We three here art that ne'er shall meet again.

Alas, poor duke! the task he undertakes Is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry: Where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.

Of much less value is my company Than your good words.

But who comes here? It is my son, young Harry Percy, Sent from my brother Worcester, whencesoever.

Harry, how fares your uncle? I had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of you.

Why, is he not with the queen? No, my good Lord, he hath forsook the court, Broken his staff of office and dispersed The household of the king.

What was his reason? He was not so resolved when last we spake together.

Have you forgot the Duke of Hereford, boy? No, my good lord, for that is not forgot Which ne'er I did remember: to my knowledge, I never in my life did look on him.

My gracious lord, I tender you my service, Such as it is, being tender, raw and young: Which elder days shall ripen and confirm To more approved service and desert.

Here come the Lords of Ross and Willoughby, Bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.

I wot your love pursues A banish'd traitor: all my treasury Is yet but unfelt thanks, which more enrich'd Shall be your love and labour's recompense.

Evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor, Which, till my infant fortune comes to years, Stands for my bounty.

But who comes here? It is my Lord of Berkeley, as I guess.

My lord, my answer is--to Lancaster, And I am come to seek that name in England, And I must find that title in your tongue, Before I make reply to aught you say.

I shall not need transport my words by you, Here comes his grace in person.

My noble uncle! Show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee, Whose duty is deceiveable and false.

My gracious uncle-- Tut, tut! Grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle: I am no traitor's uncle, and that word 'grace.

As I was banish'd, I was banish'd Hereford, But as I come, I come for Lancaster.

You have a son, Aumerle, my noble cousin, Had you first died, and he been thus trod down, He should have found his uncle Gaunt a father, To rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay.

I am denied to sue my livery here, And yet my letters-patents give me leave: My father's goods are all distrain'd and sold, And these and all are all amiss employ'd.

What would you have me do? I am a subject, And I challenge law: attorneys are denied me, And therefore, personally I lay my claim To my inheritance of free descent.

So, fare you well, Unless you please to enter in the castle And there repose you for this night.

It may be I will go with you: but yet I'll pause, For I am loath to break our country's laws.

Nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are: Things past redress are now with me past care.

My lord of Salisbury, we have stay'd ten days, And hardly kept our countrymen together, And yet we hear no tidings from the king, Therefore we will disperse ourselves: farewell.

Stay yet another day, thou trusty Welshman: The king reposeth all his confidence in thee.

Farewell: our countrymen are gone and fled, As well assured Richard their king is dead.

Ah, Richard, with the eyes of heavy mind I see thy glory like a shooting star Fall to the base earth from the firmament.

Thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west, Witnessing storms to come, woe and unrest: Thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes, And crossly to thy good all fortune goes.

This and much more, much more than twice all this, Condemns you to the death.

See them deliver'd over To execution and the hand of death.

More welcome is the stroke of death to me Than Bolingbroke to England.

Lords, farewell. My comfort is that heaven will take our souls And plague injustice with the pains of hell.

Uncle, you say the queen is at your house, For God's sake, fairly let her be entreated: Tell her I send to her my kind commends, Take special care my greetings be deliver'd.

A gentleman of mine I have dispatch'd With letters of your love to her at large.

Come, lords, away. To fight with Glendower and his complices: Awhile to work, and after holiday.

Enter KING RICHARD II, the BISHOP OF CARLISLE, DUKE OF AUMERLE, and Soldiers Barkloughly castle call they this at hand? Yea, my lord.

How brooks your grace the air, After your late tossing on the breaking seas? Needs must I like it well: I weep for joy To stand upon my kingdom once again.

Mock not my senseless conjuration, lords: This earth shall have a feeling and these stones Prove armed soldiers, ere her native king Shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.

Fear not, my lord: that Power that made you king Hath power to keep you king in spite of all.

The means that heaven yields must be embraced, And not neglected, else, if heaven would, And we will not, heaven's offer we refuse, The proffer'd means of succor and redress.

He means, my lord, that we are too remiss, Whilst Bolingbroke, through our security, Grows strong and great in substance and in power.

Welcome, my lord	how far off lies your power? Nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord, Than this weak arm: discomfort guides my tongue And bids me speak of nothing but despair.

I had forgot myself, am I not king? Awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest.

Is not the king's name twenty thousand names? Arm, arm, my name! a puny subject strikes At thy great glory.

Look not to the ground, Ye favourites of a king: are we not high? High be our thoughts: I know my uncle York Hath power enough to serve our turn.

But who comes here? More health and happiness betide my liege Than can my care-tuned tongue deliver him! Mine ear is open and my heart prepared, The worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold.

Glad am I that your highness is so arm'd To bear the tidings of calamity.

Is Bushy, Green, and the Earl of Wiltshire dead? Ay, all of them at Bristol lost their heads.

To fear the foe, since fear oppresseth strength, Gives in your weakness strength unto your foe, And so your follies fight against yourself.

Fear and be slain, no worse can come to fight: And fight and die is death destroying death, Where fearing dying pays death servile breath.

My father hath a power, inquire of him And learn to make a body of a limb.

Thou chidest me well: proud Bolingbroke, I come To change blows with thee for our day of doom.

This ague fit of fear is over-blown, An easy task it is to win our own.

Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power? Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.

Men judge by the complexion of the sky The state and inclination of the day: So may you by my dull and heavy eye, My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say.

Go to Flint castle: there I'll pine away, A king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey.

That power I have, discharge, and let them go To ear the land that hath some hope to grow, For I have none: let no man speak again To alter this, for counsel is but vain.

He does me double wrong That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.

Discharge my followers: let them hence away, From Richard's night to Bolingbroke's fair day.

So that by this intelligence we learn The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury Is gone to meet the king, who lately landed With some few private friends upon this coast.

The news is very fair and good, my lord: Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.

It would beseem the Lord Northumberland To say 'King Richard:' alack the heavy day When such a sacred king should hide his head.

Your grace mistakes, only to be brief Left I his title out.

The time hath been, Would you have been so brief with him, he would Have been so brief with you, to shorten you, For taking so the head, your whole head's length.

I know it, uncle, and oppose not myself Against their will.

But who comes here? Welcome, Harry: what, will not this castle yield? The castle royally is mann'd, my lord, Against thy entrance.

Go, signify as much, while here we march Upon the grassy carpet of this plain.

Let's march without the noise of threatening drum, That from this castle's tatter'd battlements Our fair appointments may be well perused.

Methinks King Richard and myself should meet With no less terror than the elements Of fire and water, when their thundering shock At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.

Be he the fire, I'll be the yielding water: The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain My waters, on the earth, and not on him.

This swears he, as he is a prince, is just, And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him.

Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see I talk but idly, and you laugh at me.

Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland, What says King Bolingbroke? will his majesty Give Richard leave to live till Richard die? You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay.

My lord, in the base court he doth attend To speak with you, may it please you to come down.

Down, down I come, like glistering Phaethon, Wanting the manage of unruly jades.

In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base, To come at traitors' calls and do them grace.

In the base court? Come down? Down, court! down, king! For night-owls shriek where mounting larks should sing.

What says his majesty? Sorrow and grief of heart Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man Yet he is come.

Stand all apart, And show fair duty to his majesty.

Up, cousin, up, your heart is up, I know, Thus high at least, although your knee be low.

So far be mine, my most redoubted lord, As my true service shall deserve your love.

Well you deserve: they well deserve to have, That know the strong'st and surest way to get.

Uncle, give me your hands: nay, dry your eyes, Tears show their love, but want their remedies.

Cousin, I am too young to be your father, Though you are old enough to be my heir.

What you will have, I'll give, and willing too, For do we must what force will have us do.

Set on towards London, cousin, is it so? Yea, my good lord.

Exeunt What sport shall we devise here in this garden, To drive away the heavy thought of care? Madam, we'll play at bowls.

'Twill make me think the world is full of rubs, And that my fortune rubs against the bias.

My legs can keep no measure in delight, When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief: Therefore, no dancing, girl, some other sport.

'Tis well that thou hast cause But thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep.

And I could sing, would weeping do me good, And never borrow any tear of thee.

But stay, here come the gardeners: Let's step into the shadow of these trees.

My wretchedness unto a row of pins, They'll talk of state, for every one doth so Against a change, woe is forerun with woe.

Go thou, and like an executioner, Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays, That look too lofty in our commonwealth: All must be even in our government.

You thus employ'd, I will go root away The noisome weeds, which without profit suck The soil's fertility from wholesome flowers.

What, are they dead? They are, and Bolingbroke Hath seized the wasteful king.

Pardon me, madam: little joy have I To breathe this news, yet what I say is true.

Post you to London, and you will find it so, I speak no more than every one doth know.

Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot, Doth not thy embassage belong to me, And am I last that knows it? O, thou think'st To serve me last, that I may longest keep Thy sorrow in my breast.

Come, ladies, go, To meet at London London's king in woe.

What, was I born to this, that my sad look Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke? Gardener, for telling me these news of woe, Pray God the plants thou graft'st may never grow.

Poor queen! so that thy state might be no worse, I would my skill were subject to thy curse.

Here did she fall a tear, here in this place I'll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace: Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen, In the remembrance of a weeping queen.

Now, Bagot, freely speak thy mind, What thou dost know of noble Gloucester's death, Who wrought it with the king, and who perform'd The bloody office of his timeless end.

My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue Scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver'd.

Excepting one, I would he were the best In all this presence that hath moved me so.

If thou deny'st it twenty times, thou liest, And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart, Where it was forged, with my rapier's point.

Who sets me else? by heaven, I'll throw at all: I have a thousand spirits in one breast, To answer twenty thousand such as you.

My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember well The very time Aumerle and you did talk.

'Tis very true: you were in presence then, And you can witness with me this is true.

Some honest Christian trust me with a gage That Norfolk lies: here do I throw down this, If he may be repeal'd, to try his honour.

Why, bishop, is Norfolk dead? As surely as I live, my lord.

Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom Of good old Abraham! Lords appellants, Your differences shall all rest under gage Till we assign you to your days of trial.

God forbid! Worst in this royal presence may I speak, Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.

Would God that any in this noble presence Were enough noble to be upright judge Of noble Richard! then true noblesse would Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.

O, if you raise this house against this house, It will the woefullest division prove That ever fell upon this cursed earth.

Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so, Lest child, child's children, cry against you woe! Well have you argued, sir, and, for your pains, Of capital treason we arrest you here.

My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge To keep him safely till his day of trial.

May it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit.

Fetch hither Richard, that in common view He may surrender, so we shall proceed Without suspicion.

Lords, you that here are under our arrest, Procure your sureties for your days of answer.

Little are we beholding to your love, And little look'd for at your helping hands.

God save the king! Will no man say amen? Am I both priest and clerk? well then, amen.

God save the king! although I be not he, And yet, amen, if heaven do think him me.

To do what service am I sent for hither? To do that office of thine own good will Which tired majesty did make thee offer, The resignation of thy state and crown To Henry Bolingbroke.

Here, cousin, seize the crown, Here cousin: On this side my hand, and on that side yours.

My crown I am, but still my griefs are mine: You may my glories and my state depose, But not my griefs, still am I king of those.

My care is loss of care, by old care done, Your care is gain of care, by new care won: The cares I give I have, though given away, They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.

Are you contented to resign the crown? Ay, no, no, ay, for I must nothing be, Therefore no no, for I resign to thee.

Mine eyes are full of tears, I cannot see: And yet salt water blinds them not so much But they can see a sort of traitors here.

Fiend, thou torment'st me ere I come to hell! Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.

They shall be satisfied: I'll read enough, When I do see the very book indeed Where all my sins are writ, and that's myself.

Re-enter Attendant, with a glass Give me the glass, and therein will I read.

Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport, How soon my sorrow hath destroy'd my face.

The shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'd The shadow or your face.

I'll beg one boon, And then be gone and trouble you no more.

'Fair cousin'? I am greater than a king: For when I was a king, my flatterers Were then but subjects, being now a subject, I have a king here to my flatterer.

O, good! convey? conveyers are you all, That rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.

On Wednesday next we solemnly set down Our coronation: lords, prepare yourselves.

I see your brows are full of discontent, Your hearts of sorrow and your eyes of tears: Come home with me to supper, and I'll lay A plot shall show us all a merry day.

But soft, but see, or rather do not see, My fair rose wither: yet look up, behold, That you in pity may dissolve to dew, And wash him fresh again with true-love tears.

Hie thee to France And cloister thee in some religious house: Our holy lives must win a new world's crown, Which our profane hours here have stricken down.

Good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for France: Think I am dead and that even here thou takest, As from my death-bed, thy last living leave.

My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed: You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.

And, madam, there is order ta'en for you, With all swift speed you must away to France.

The love of wicked men converts to fear, That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both To worthy danger and deserved death.

Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate A twofold marriage, 'twixt my crown and me, And then betwixt me and my married wife.

Let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me, And yet not so, for with a kiss 'twas made.

And must we be divided? must we part? Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.

Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here, Better far off than near, be ne'er the near.

Twice for one step I'll groan, the way being short, And piece the way out with a heavy heart.

Come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief, Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief, One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part, Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.

Give me mine own again, 'twere no good part To take on me to keep and kill thy heart.

So, now I have mine own again, be gone, That I might strive to kill it with a groan.

We make woe wanton with this fond delay: Once more, adieu, the rest let sorrow say.

My lord, you told me you would tell the rest, When weeping made you break the story off, of our two cousins coming into London.

Where did I leave? At that sad stop, my lord, Where rude misgovern'd hands from windows' tops Threw dust and rubbish on King Richard's head.

But heaven hath a hand in these events, To whose high will we bound our calm contents.

To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now, Whose state and honour I for aye allow.

Aumerle that was, But that is lost for being Richard's friend, And, madam, you must call him Rutland now: I am in parliament pledge for his truth And lasting fealty to the new-made king.

Welcome, my son: who are the violets now That strew the green lap of the new come spring? Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not: God knows I had as lief be none as one.

Well, bear you well in this new spring of time, Lest you be cropp'd before you come to prime.

What news from Oxford? hold those justs and triumphs? For aught I know, my lord, they do.

What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom? Yea, look'st thou pale? let me see the writing.

No matter, then, who see it, I will be satisfied, let me see the writing.

I do beseech your grace to pardon me: It is a matter of small consequence, Which for some reasons I would not have seen.

I fear, I fear,-- What should you fear? 'Tis nothing but some bond, that he is enter'd into For gay apparel 'gainst the triumph day.

Bound to himself! what doth he with a bond That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool.

He plucks it out of his bosom and reads it Treason! foul treason! Villain! traitor! slave! What is the matter, my lord? Ho! who is within there? Saddle my horse.

God for his mercy, what treachery is here! Why, what is it, my lord? Give me my boots, I say, saddle my horse.

Now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth, I will appeach the villain.

What is the matter, Aumerle. Good mother, be content, it is no more Than my poor life must answer.

Thy life answer! Bring me my boots: I will unto the king.

Poor boy, thou art amazed. Hence, villain! never more come in my sight.

He shall be none, We'll keep him here: then what is that to him? Away, fond woman! were he twenty times my son, I would appeach him.

Hadst thou groan'd for him As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful.

Make way, unruly woman! After, Aumerle! mount thee upon his horse, Spur post, and get before him to the king, And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.

I'll not be long behind, though I be old, I doubt not but to ride as fast as York: And never will I rise up from the ground Till Bolingbroke have pardon'd thee.

Away, be gone! Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son? 'Tis full three months since I did see him last, If any plague hang over us, 'tis he.

My lord, some two days since I saw the prince, And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.

And what said the gallant? His answer was, he would unto the stews, And from the common'st creature pluck a glove, And wear it as a favour, and with that He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.

As dissolute as desperate, yet through both I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years May happily bring forth.

But who comes here? Where is the king? What means our cousin, that he stares and looks So wildly? God save your grace! I do beseech your majesty, To have some conference with your grace alone.

What is the matter with our cousin now? For ever may my knees grow to the earth, My tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth Unless a pardon ere I rise or speak.

Intended or committed was this fault? If on the first, how heinous e'er it be, To win thy after-love I pardon thee.

Then give me leave that I may turn the key, That no man enter till my tale be done.

Stay thy revengeful hand, thou hast no cause to fear.

Shall I for love speak treason to thy face? Open the door, or I will break it open.

What is the matter, uncle? speak, Recover breath, tell us how near is danger, That we may arm us to encounter it.

Peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know The treason that my haste forbids me show.

Remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass'd: I do repent me, read not my name there My heart is not confederate with my hand.

I tore it from the traitor's bosom, king, Fear, and not love, begets his penitence: Forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove A serpent that will sting thee to the heart.

So shall my virtue be his vice's bawd, And he shall spend mine honour with his shame, As thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold.

Mine honour lives when his dishonour dies, Or my shamed life in his dishonour lies: Thou kill'st me in his life, giving him breath, The traitor lives, the true man's put to death.

What shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry? A woman, and thy aunt, great king, 'tis I.

Our scene is alter'd from a serious thing, And now changed to 'The Beggar and the King.

My dangerous cousin, let your mother in: I know she is come to pray for your foul sin.

If thou do pardon, whosoever pray, More sins for this forgiveness prosper may.

This fester'd joint cut off, the rest rest sound, This let alone will all the rest confound.

O king, believe not this hard-hearted man! Love loving not itself none other can.

Thou frantic woman, what dost thou make here? Shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear? Sweet York, be patient.

Not yet, I thee beseech: For ever will I walk upon my knees, And never see day that the happy sees, Till thou give joy, until thou bid me joy, By pardoning Rutland, my transgressing boy.

Our prayers do out-pray his, then let them have That mercy which true prayer ought to have.

Nay, do not say, 'stand up,' Say, 'pardon' first, and afterwards 'stand up.

And if I were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach, 'Pardon' should be the first word of thy speech.

I never long'd to hear a word till now, Say 'pardon,' king, let pity teach thee how: The word is short, but not so short as sweet, No word like 'pardon' for kings' mouths so meet.

Thine eye begins to speak, set thy tongue there, Or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear, That hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce, Pity may move thee 'pardon' to rehearse.

I do not sue to stand, Pardon is all the suit I have in hand.

O happy vantage of a kneeling knee! Yet am I sick for fear: speak it again, Twice saying 'pardon' doth not pardon twain, But makes one pardon strong.

But for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot, With all the rest of that consorted crew, Destruction straight shall dog them at the heels.

Good uncle, help to order several powers To Oxford, or where'er these traitors are: They shall not live within this world, I swear, But I will have them, if I once know where.

Uncle, farewell: and, cousin too, adieu: Your mother well hath pray'd, and prove you true.

Didst thou not mark the king, what words he spake, 'Have I no friend will rid me of this living fear?' Was it not so? These were his very words.

'Have I no friend?' quoth he: he spake it twice, And urged it twice together, did he not? He did.

And speaking it, he wistly look'd on me, And who should say, 'I would thou wert the man' That would divorce this terror from my heart,' Meaning the king at Pomfret.

Come, let's go: I am the king's friend, and will rid his foe.

I have been studying how I may compare This prison where I live unto the world: And for because the world is populous And here is not a creature but myself, I cannot do it, yet I'll hammer it out.

Music do I hear? Ha, ha! keep time: how sour sweet music is, When time is broke and no proportion kept! So is it in the music of men's lives.

And here have I the daintiness of ear To cheque time broke in a disorder'd string, But for the concord of my state and time Had not an ear to hear my true time broke.

This music mads me, let it sound no more, For though it have holp madmen to their wits, In me it seems it will make wise men mad.

Yet blessing on his heart that gives it me! For 'tis a sign of love, and love to Richard Is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.

Hail, royal prince! Thanks, noble peer, The cheapest of us is ten groats too dear.

So proud that Bolingbroke was on his back! That jade hath eat bread from my royal hand, This hand hath made him proud with clapping him.

What my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.

My lord, will't please you to fall to? Taste of it first, as thou art wont to do.

My lord, I dare not: Sir Pierce of Exton, who lately came from the king, commands the contrary.

The devil take Henry of Lancaster and thee! Patience is stale, and I am weary of it.

Beats the keeper Help, help, help! How now! what means death in this rude assault? Villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.

Snatching an axe from a Servant and killing him Go thou, and fill another room in hell.

Then Exton strikes him down That hand shall burn in never-quenching fire That staggers thus my person.

Exton, thy fierce hand Hath with the king's blood stain'd the king's own land.

Mount, mount, my soul! thy seat is up on high, Whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die.

As full of valour as of royal blood: Both have I spill'd, O would the deed were good! For now the devil, that told me I did well, Says that this deed is chronicled in hell.

This dead king to the living king I'll bear Take hence the rest, and give them burial here.

Welcome, my lord	what is the news? First, to thy sacred state wish I all happiness.

The next news is, I have to London sent The heads of Oxford, Salisbury, Blunt, and Kent: The manner of their taking may appear At large discoursed in this paper here.

We thank thee, gentle Percy, for thy pains, And to thy worth will add right worthy gains.

My lord, I have from Oxford sent to London The heads of Brocas and Sir Bennet Seely, Two of the dangerous consorted traitors That sought at Oxford thy dire overthrow.

Thy pains, Fitzwater, shall not be forgot, Right noble is thy merit, well I wot.

Great king, within this coffin I present Thy buried fear: herein all breathless lies The mightiest of thy greatest enemies, Richard of Bordeaux, by me hither brought.

Exton, I thank thee not, for thou hast wrought A deed of slander with thy fatal hand Upon my head and all this famous land.

They love not poison that do poison need, Nor do I thee: though I did wish him dead, I hate the murderer, love him murdered.

The guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour, But neither my good word nor princely favour: With Cain go wander through shades of night, And never show thy head by day nor light.

Now is the winter of our discontent Made glorious summer by this sun of York, And all the clouds that lour'd upon our house In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.

Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths, Our bruised arms hung up for monuments, Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings, Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.

Dive, thoughts, down to my soul: here Clarence comes.

Brother, good day, what means this armed guard That waits upon your grace? His majesty Tendering my person's safety, hath appointed This conduct to convey me to the Tower.

Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours, He should, for that, commit your godfathers: O, belike his majesty hath some intent That you shall be new-christen'd in the Tower.

And says a wizard told him that by G His issue disinherited should be, And, for my name of George begins with G, It follows in his thought that I am he.

These, as I learn, and such like toys as these Have moved his highness to commit me now.

Why, this it is, when men are ruled by women: 'Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower: My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, 'tis she That tempers him to this extremity.

By heaven, I think there's no man is secure But the queen's kindred and night-walking heralds That trudge betwixt the king and Mistress Shore.

Heard ye not what an humble suppliant Lord hastings was to her for his delivery? Humbly complaining to her deity Got my lord chamberlain his liberty.

I beseech your graces both to pardon me, His majesty hath straitly given in charge That no man shall have private conference, Of what degree soever, with his brother.

Naught to do with mistress Shore! I tell thee, fellow, He that doth naught with her, excepting one, Were best he do it secretly, alone.

What one, my lord? Her husband, knave: wouldst thou betray me? I beseech your grace to pardon me, and withal Forbear your conference with the noble duke.

Brother, farewell: I will unto the king, And whatsoever you will employ me in, Were it to call King Edward's widow sister, I will perform it to enfranchise you.

Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood Touches me deeper than you can imagine.

Well, your imprisonment shall not be long, Meantime, have patience.

Farewell. Go, tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return.

Simple, plain Clarence! I do love thee so, That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven, If heaven will take the present at our hands.

But who comes here? the new-deliver'd Hastings? Good time of day unto my gracious lord! As much unto my good lord chamberlain! Well are you welcome to the open air.

How hath your lordship brook'd imprisonment? With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must: But I shall live, my lord, to give them thanks That were the cause of my imprisonment.

No doubt, no doubt, and so shall Clarence too, For they that were your enemies are his, And have prevail'd as much on him as you.

More pity that the eagle should be mew'd, While kites and buzzards prey at liberty.

What news abroad? No news so bad abroad as this at home, The King is sickly, weak and melancholy, And his physicians fear him mightily.

O, he hath kept an evil diet long, And overmuch consumed his royal person: 'Tis very grievous to be thought upon.

He cannot live, I hope, and must not die Till George be pack'd with post-horse up to heaven.

But yet I run before my horse to market: Clarence still breathes, Edward still lives and reigns: When they are gone, then must I count my gains.

Set down, set down your honourable load, If honour may be shrouded in a hearse, Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament The untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster.

What black magician conjures up this fiend, To stop devoted charitable deeds? Villains, set down the corse, or, by Saint Paul, I'll make a corse of him that disobeys.

Unmanner'd dog! stand thou, when I command: Advance thy halbert higher than my breast, Or, by Saint Paul, I'll strike thee to my foot, And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.

What, do you tremble? are you all afraid? Alas, I blame you not, for you are mortal, And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.

Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell! Thou hadst but power over his mortal body, His soul thou canst not have, therefore be gone.

Foul devil, for God's sake, hence, and trouble us not, For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell, Fill'd it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.

If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds, Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.

Villain, thou know'st no law of God nor man: No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.

O wonderful, when devils tell the truth! More wonderful, when angels are so angry.

Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman, Of these supposed-evils, to give me leave, By circumstance, but to acquit myself.

Vouchsafe, defused infection of a man, For these known evils, but to give me leave, By circumstance, to curse thy cursed self.

Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have Some patient leisure to excuse myself.

Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make No excuse current, but to hang thyself.

And, by despairing, shouldst thou stand excused, For doing worthy vengeance on thyself, Which didst unworthy slaughter upon others.

Say that I slew them not? Why, then they are not dead: But dead they are, and devilish slave, by thee.

In thy foul throat thou liest: Queen Margaret saw Thy murderous falchion smoking in his blood, The which thou once didst bend against her breast, But that thy brothers beat aside the point.

I was provoked by her slanderous tongue, which laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.

Which never dreamt on aught but butcheries: Didst thou not kill this king? I grant ye.

Dost grant me, hedgehog? then, God grant me too Thou mayst be damned for that wicked deed! O, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous! The fitter for the King of heaven, that hath him.

Let him thank me, that holp to send him thither, For he was fitter for that place than earth.

I'll rest betide the chamber where thou liest! So will it, madam till I lie with you.

Your beauty was the cause of that effect, Your beauty: which did haunt me in my sleep To undertake the death of all the world, So I might live one hour in your sweet bosom.

If I thought that, I tell thee, homicide, These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.

These eyes could never endure sweet beauty's wreck, You should not blemish it, if I stood by: As all the world is cheered by the sun, So I by that, it is my day, my life.

Black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life! Curse not thyself, fair creature thou art both.

It is a quarrel most unnatural, To be revenged on him that loveth you.

It is a quarrel just and reasonable, To be revenged on him that slew my husband.

He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband, Did it to help thee to a better husband.

Where is he? She spitteth at him Why dost thou spit at me? Would it were mortal poison, for thy sake! Never came poison from so sweet a place.

Would they were basilisks, to strike thee dead! I would they were, that I might die at once, For now they kill me with a living death.

I never sued to friend nor enemy, My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word, But now thy beauty is proposed my fee, My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.

She looks scornfully at him Teach not thy lips such scorn, for they were made For kissing, lady, not for such contempt.

If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive, Lo, here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword, Which if thou please to hide in this true bosom.

And let the soul forth that adoreth thee, I lay it naked to the deadly stroke, And humbly beg the death upon my knee.

He lays his breast open: she offers at it with his sword Nay, do not pause, for I did kill King Henry, But 'twas thy beauty that provoked me.

Nay, now dispatch, 'twas I that stabb'd young Edward, But 'twas thy heavenly face that set me on.

Here she lets fall the sword Take up the sword again, or take up me.

Arise, dissembler: though I wish thy death, I will not be the executioner.

But shall I live in hope? All men, I hope, live so.

Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart, Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.

And if thy poor devoted suppliant may But beg one favour at thy gracious hand, Thou dost confirm his happiness for ever.

With all my heart, and much it joys me too, To see you are become so penitent.

'Tis more than you deserve, But since you teach me how to flatter you, Imagine I have said farewell already.

Towards Chertsey, noble lord? No, to White-Friars, there attend my coining.

Was ever woman in this humour woo'd? Was ever woman in this humour won? I'll have her, but I will not keep her long.

I'll be at charges for a looking-glass, And entertain some score or two of tailors, To study fashions to adorn my body: Since I am crept in favour with myself, Will maintain it with some little cost.

But first I'll turn yon fellow in his grave, And then return lamenting to my love.

Shine out, fair sun, till I have bought a glass, That I may see my shadow as I pass.

Have patience, madam: there's no doubt his majesty Will soon recover his accustom'd health.

In that you brook it in, it makes him worse: Therefore, for God's sake, entertain good comfort, And cheer his grace with quick and merry words.

If he were dead, what would betide of me? No other harm but loss of such a lord.

The heavens have bless'd you with a goodly son, To be your comforter when he is gone.

Oh, he is young and his minority Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester, A man that loves not me, nor none of you.

Is it concluded that he shall be protector? It is determined, not concluded yet: But so it must be, if the king miscarry.

Good time of day unto your royal grace! God make your majesty joyful as you have been! The Countess Richmond, good my Lord of Derby.

Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she's your wife, And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured I hate not you for her proud arrogance.

Saw you the king to-day, my Lord of Derby? But now the Duke of Buckingham and I Are come from visiting his majesty.

What likelihood of his amendment, lords? Madam, good hope, his grace speaks cheerfully.

Would all were well! but that will never be I fear our happiness is at the highest.

Because I cannot flatter and speak fair, Smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive and cog, Duck with French nods and apish courtesy, I must be held a rancorous enemy.

I cannot tell: the world is grown so bad, That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch: Since every Jack became a gentleman There's many a gentle person made a Jack.

By Him that raised me to this careful height From that contented hap which I enjoy'd, I never did incense his majesty Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been An earnest advocate to plead for him.

My lord, you do me shameful injury, Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.

You may deny that you were not the cause Of my Lord Hastings' late imprisonment.

What may she not? She may, yea, marry, may she-- What, marry, may she? What, marry, may she! marry with a king, A bachelor, a handsome stripling too: I wis your grandam had a worser match.

My Lord of Gloucester, I have too long borne Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs: By heaven, I will acquaint his majesty With those gross taunts I often have endured.

I had rather be a country servant-maid Than a great queen, with this condition, To be thus taunted, scorn'd, and baited at: Small joy have I in being England's queen.

And lessen'd be that small, God, I beseech thee! Thy honour, state and seat is due to me.

What! threat you me with telling of the king? Tell him, and spare not: look, what I have said I will avouch in presence of the king: I dare adventure to be sent to the Tower.

Out, devil! I remember them too well: Thou slewest my husband Henry in the Tower, And Edward, my poor son, at Tewksbury.

In all which time you and your husband Grey Were factious for the house of Lancaster, And, Rivers, so were you.

Was not your husband In Margaret's battle at Saint Alban's slain? Let me put in your minds, if you forget, What you have been ere now, and what you are, Withal, what I have been, and what I am.

I would to God my heart were flint, like Edward's, Or Edward's soft and pitiful, like mine I am too childish-foolish for this world.

Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world, Thou cacodemon! there thy kingdom is.

My Lord of Gloucester, in those busy days Which here you urge to prove us enemies, We follow'd then our lord, our lawful king: So should we you, if you should be our king.

A little joy enjoys the queen thereof, For I am she, and altogether joyless.

Wert thou not banished on pain of death? I was, but I do find more pain in banishment Than death can yield me here by my abode.

A husband and a son thou owest to me, And thou a kingdom, all of you allegiance: The sorrow that I have, by right is yours, And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.

O, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe, And the most merciless that e'er was heard of! Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.

I cry thee mercy then, for I had thought That thou hadst call'd me all these bitter names.

O, let me make the period to my curse! 'Tis done by me, and ends in 'Margaret.

Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.

Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune! Why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider, Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about? Fool, fool! thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself.

The time will come when thou shalt wish for me To help thee curse that poisonous bunchback'd toad.

False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse, Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.

Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.

To serve me well, you all should do me duty, Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects: O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty! Dispute not with her, she is lunatic.

Peace, master marquess, you are malapert: Your fire-new stamp of honour is scarce current.

O, that your young nobility could judge What 'twere to lose it, and be miserable! They that stand high have many blasts to shake them, And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.

Good counsel, marry: learn it, learn it, marquess.

Yea, and much more: but I was born so high, Our aery buildeth in the cedar's top, And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.

And turns the sun to shade, alas! alas! Witness my son, now in the shade of death, Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath Hath in eternal darkness folded up.

O God, that seest it, do not suffer it! As it was won with blood, lost be it so! Have done! for shame, if not for charity.

Urge neither charity nor shame to me: Uncharitably with me have you dealt, And shamefully by you my hopes are butcher'd.

My charity is outrage, life my shame And in that shame still live my sorrow's rage.

Nor no one here, for curses never pass The lips of those that breathe them in the air.

I'll not believe but they ascend the sky, And there awake God's gentle-sleeping peace.

What doth she say, my Lord of Buckingham? Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.

I cannot blame her: by God's holy mother, She hath had too much wrong, and I repent My part thereof that I have done to her.

I was too hot to do somebody good, That is too cold in thinking of it now.

Madam, his majesty doth call for you, And for your grace, and you, my noble lords.

Lords, will you go with us? Madam, we will attend your grace.

The secret mischiefs that I set abroach I lay unto the grievous charge of others.

How now, my hardy, stout resolved mates! Are you now going to dispatch this deed? We are, my lord, and come to have the warrant That we may be admitted where he is.

Gives the warrant When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.

But, sirs, be sudden in the execution, Withal obdurate, do not hear him plead, For Clarence is well-spoken, and perhaps May move your hearts to pity if you mark him.

Fear not, my lord, we will not stand to prate, Talkers are no good doers: be assured We come to use our hands and not our tongues.

Your eyes drop millstones, when fools' eyes drop tears: I like you, lads, about your business straight, Go, go, dispatch.

As we paced along Upon the giddy footing of the hatches, Methought that Gloucester stumbled, and, in falling, Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard, Into the tumbling billows of the main.

No marvel, my lord, though it affrighted you, I promise, I am afraid to hear you tell it.

I will, my lord: God give your grace good rest! CLARENCE sleeps Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours, Makes the night morning, and the noon-tide night.

Ho! who's here? In God's name what are you, and how came you hither? I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs.

Yea, are you so brief? O sir, it is better to be brief than tedious.

BRAKENBURY reads it I am, in this, commanded to deliver The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands: I will not reason what is meant hereby, Because I will be guiltless of the meaning.

Here are the keys, there sits the duke asleep: I'll to the king, and signify to him That thus I have resign'd my charge to you.

What, shall we stab him as he sleeps? No, then he will say 'twas done cowardly, when he wakes.

When he wakes! why, fool, he shall never wake till the judgment-day.

The urging of that word 'judgment' hath bred a kind of remorse in me.

What, art thou afraid? Not to kill him, having a warrant for it, but to be damned for killing him, from which no warrant can defend us.

I pray thee, stay a while: I hope my holy humour will change, 'twas wont to hold me but while one would tell twenty.

How dost thou feel thyself now? 'Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me.

Where is thy conscience now? In the Duke of Gloucester's purse.

So when he opens his purse to give us our reward, thy conscience flies out.

'Zounds, it is even now at my elbow, persuading me not to kill the duke.

Take the devil in thy mind, and relieve him not: he would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.

Tut, I am strong-framed, he cannot prevail with me, I warrant thee.

Spoke like a tail fellow that respects his reputation.

Come, shall we to this gear? Take him over the costard with the hilts of thy sword, and then we will chop him in the malmsey-butt in the next room.

Hark! he stirs: shall I strike? No, first let's reason with him.

How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak! Your eyes do menace me: why look you pale? Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come? To, to, to-- To murder me? Ay, ay.

You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so, And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.

Wherein, my friends, have I offended you? Offended us you have not, but the king.

I charge you, as you hope to have redemption By Christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins, That you depart and lay no hands on me The deed you undertake is damnable.

And that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee, For false forswearing and for murder too: Thou didst receive the holy sacrament, To fight in quarrel of the house of Lancaster.

And, like a traitor to the name of God, Didst break that vow, and with thy treacherous blade Unrip'dst the bowels of thy sovereign's son.

O, know you yet, he doth it publicly, Take not the quarrel from his powerful arm, He needs no indirect nor lawless course To cut off those that have offended him.

Who made thee, then, a bloody minister, When gallant-springing brave Plantagenet, That princely novice, was struck dead by thee? My brother's love, the devil, and my rage.

Thy brother's love, our duty, and thy fault, Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.

Oh, if you love my brother, hate not me, I am his brother, and I love him well.

If you be hired for meed, go back again, And I will send you to my brother Gloucester, Who shall reward you better for my life Than Edward will for tidings of my death.

You are deceived, your brother Gloucester hates you.

O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear: Go you to him from me.

Thou deceivest thyself: 'Tis he that sent us hither now to slaughter thee.

It cannot be, for when I parted with him, He hugg'd me in his arms, and swore, with sobs, That he would labour my delivery.

Why, so he doth, now he delivers thee From this world's thraldom to the joys of heaven.

Take that, and that: if all this will not do, Stabs him I'll drown you in the malmsey-butt within.

Now must I hide his body in some hole, Until the duke take order for his burial: And when I have my meed, I must away, For this will out, and here I must not stay.

Rivers and Hastings, take each other's hand, Dissemble not your hatred, swear your love.

By heaven, my heart is purged from grudging hate: And with my hand I seal my true heart's love.

Here, Hastings, I will never more remember Our former hatred, so thrive I and mine! Dorset, embrace him, Hastings, love lord marquess.

This interchange of love, I here protest, Upon my part shall be unviolable.

And so swear I, my lord They embrace Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league With thy embracements to my wife's allies, And make me happy in your unity.

A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham, is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.

There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here, To make the perfect period of this peace.

Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen: And, princely peers, a happy time of day! Happy, indeed, as we have spent the day.

Brother, we done deeds of charity, Made peace enmity, fair love of hate, Between these swelling wrong-incensed peers.

I do not know that Englishman alive With whom my soul is any jot at odds More than the infant that is born to-night I thank my God for my humility.

A holy day shall this be kept hereafter: I would to God all strifes were well compounded.

My sovereign liege, I do beseech your majesty To take our brother Clarence to your grace.

Why, madam, have I offer'd love for this To be so bouted in this royal presence? Who knows not that the noble duke is dead? They all start You do him injury to scorn his corse.

But he, poor soul, by your first order died, And that a winged Mercury did bear: Some tardy cripple bore the countermand, That came too lag to see him buried.

The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant's life, Who slew to-day a righteous gentleman Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.

Have a tongue to doom my brother's death, And shall the same give pardon to a slave? My brother slew no man, his fault was thought, And yet his punishment was cruel death.

The proudest of you all Have been beholding to him in his life, Yet none of you would once plead for his life.

O God, I fear thy justice will take hold On me, and you, and mine, and yours for this! Come, Hastings, help me to my closet.

But come, let us in, To comfort Edward with our company.

Tell me, good grandam, is our father dead? No, boy.

As loath to lose him, not your father's death, It were lost sorrow to wail one that's lost.

The king my uncle is to blame for this: God will revenge it, whom I will importune With daily prayers all to that effect.

Peace, children, peace! the king doth love you well: Incapable and shallow innocents, You cannot guess who caused your father's death.

Oh, that deceit should steal such gentle shapes, And with a virtuous vizard hide foul guile! He is my son, yea, and therein my shame, Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.

Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam? Ay, boy.

Hark! what noise is this? Oh, who shall hinder me to wail and weep, To chide my fortune, and torment myself? I'll join with black despair against my soul, And to myself become an enemy.

What means this scene of rude impatience? To make an act of tragic violence: Edward, my lord, your son, our king, is dead.

Was never widow had so dear a loss! Were never orphans had so dear a loss! Was never mother had so dear a loss! Alas, I am the mother of these moans! Their woes are parcell'd, mine are general.

Madam, have comfort: all of us have cause To wail the dimming of our shining star, But none can cure their harms by wailing them.

Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy, I did not see your grace: humbly on my knee I crave your blessing.

God bless thee, and put meekness in thy mind, Love, charity, obedience, and true duty! That is the butt-end of a mother's blessing: I marvel why her grace did leave it out.

I hope the king made peace with all of us And the compact is firm and true in me.

Then be it so, and go we to determine Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow.

Madam, and you, my mother, will you go To give your censures in this weighty business? With all our harts.

My other self, my counsel's consistory, My oracle, my prophet! My dear cousin, I, like a child, will go by thy direction.

Neighbour, well met: whither away so fast? I promise you, I scarcely know myself: Hear you the news abroad? Ay, that the king is dead.

Bad news, by'r lady, seldom comes the better: I fear, I fear 'twill prove a troublous world.

Doth this news hold of good King Edward's death? Ay, sir, it is too true, God help the while! Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.

So stood the state when Henry the Sixth Was crown'd in Paris but at nine months old.

Stood the state so? No, no, good friends, God wot, For then this land was famously enrich'd With politic grave counsel, then the king Had virtuous uncles to protect his grace.

Better it were they all came by the father, Or by the father there were none at all, For emulation now, who shall be nearest, Will touch us all too near, if God prevent not.

O, full of danger is the Duke of Gloucester! And the queen's sons and brothers haught and proud: And were they to be ruled, and not to rule, This sickly land might solace as before.

When clouds appear, wise men put on their cloaks, When great leaves fall, the winter is at hand, When the sun sets, who doth not look for night? Untimely storms make men expect a dearth.

All may be well, but, if God sort it so, 'Tis more than we deserve, or I expect.

Truly, the souls of men are full of dread: Ye cannot reason almost with a man That looks not heavily and full of fear.

Before the times of change, still is it so: By a divine instinct men's minds mistrust Ensuing dangers, as by proof, we see The waters swell before a boisterous storm.

whither away? Marry, we were sent for to the justices.

Last night, I hear, they lay at Northampton, At Stony-Stratford will they be to-night: To-morrow, or next day, they will be here.

I long with all my heart to see the prince: I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.

But I hear, no, they say my son of York Hath almost overta'en him in his growth.

Now, by my troth, if I had been remember'd, I could have given my uncle's grace a flout, To touch his growth nearer than he touch'd mine.

Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old 'Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.

I pray thee, pretty York, who told thee this? Grandam, his nurse.

What news? Such news, my lord, as grieves me to unfold.

What is thy news then? Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret, With them Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.

Who hath committed them? The mighty dukes Gloucester and Buckingham.

For what offence? The sum of all I can, I have disclosed, Why or for what these nobles were committed Is all unknown to me, my gracious lady.

My gracious lady, go, And thither bear your treasure and your goods.

For my part, I'll resign unto your grace The seal I keep: and so betide to me As well I tender you and all of yours! Come, I'll conduct you to the sanctuary.

Enter the young PRINCE EDWARD, GLOUCESTER, BUCKINGHAM, CARDINAL, CATESBY, and others Welcome, sweet prince, to London, to your chamber.

Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign The weary way hath made you melancholy.

No, uncle, but our crosses on the way Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy I want more uncles here to welcome me.

God bless your grace with health and happy days! I thank you, good my lord, and thank you all.

You are too senseless--obstinate, my lord, Too ceremonious and traditional Weigh it but with the grossness of this age, You break not sanctuary in seizing him.

Oft have I heard of sanctuary men, But sanctuary children ne'er till now.

Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me? I go, my lord.

Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come, Where shall we sojourn till our coronation? Where it seems best unto your royal self.

If I may counsel you, some day or two Your highness shall repose you at the Tower: Then where you please, and shall be thought most fit For your best health and recreation.

Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord? He did, my gracious lord, begin that place, Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.

Is it upon record, or else reported Successively from age to age, he built it? Upon record, my gracious lord.

But say, my lord, it were not register'd, Methinks the truth should live from age to age, As 'twere retail'd to all posterity, Even to the general all-ending day.

What say you, uncle? I say, without characters, fame lives long.

Thus, like the formal vice, Iniquity, I moralize two meanings in one word.

I'll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham,-- What, my gracious lord? An if I live until I be a man, I'll win our ancient right in France again, Or die a soldier, as I lived a king.

Richard of York! how fares our loving brother? Well, my dread lord, so must I call you now.

Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours: Too late he died that might have kept that title, Which by his death hath lost much majesty.

How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York? I thank you, gentle uncle.

O, my lord, You said that idle weeds are fast in growth The prince my brother hath outgrown me far.

And therefore is he idle? O, my fair cousin, I must not say so.

He may command me as my sovereign, But you have power in me as in a kinsman.

A beggar, brother? Of my kind uncle, that I know will give, And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.

O, then, I see, you will part but with light gifts, In weightier things you'll say a beggar nay.

What, would you have my weapon, little lord? I would, that I might thank you as you call me.

My Lord of York will still be cross in talk: Uncle, your grace knows how to bear with him.

You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me: Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me, Because that I am little, like an ape, He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.

With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons! To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle, He prettily and aptly taunts himself: So cunning and so young is wonderful.

My lord, will't please you pass along? Myself and my good cousin Buckingham Will to your mother, to entreat of her To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.

What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord? My lord protector needs will have it so.

Why, what should you fear? Marry, my uncle Clarence' angry ghost: My grandam told me he was murdered there.

But come, my lord, and with a heavy heart, Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.

What think'st thou, then, of Stanley? what will he? He will do all in all as Hastings doth.

Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep? You shall, my lord.

Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards We may digest our complots in some form.

What, ho! my lord! A messenger from the Lord Stanley.

Cannot thy master sleep these tedious nights? So it should seem by that I have to say.

Therefore he sends to know your lordship's pleasure, If presently you will take horse with him, And with all speed post with him toward the north, To shun the danger that his soul divines.

Go, bid thy master rise and come to me And we will both together to the Tower, Where, he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.

How! wear the garland! dost thou mean the crown? Ay, my good lord.

I'll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders Ere I will see the crown so foul misplaced.

God keep your lordship in that gracious mind! But I shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence, That they who brought me in my master's hate I live to look upon their tragedy.

I tell thee, Catesby-- What, my lord? Ere a fortnight make me elder, I'll send some packing that yet think not on it.

'Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord, When men are unprepared and look not for it.

The princes both make high account of you, For they account his head upon the bridge.

This sudden stag of rancour I misdoubt: Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward! What, shall we toward the Tower? the day is spent.

Wot you what, my lord? To-day the lords you talk of are beheaded.

They, for their truth, might better wear their heads Than some that have accused them wear their hats.

How now, sirrah! how goes the world with thee? The better that your lordship please to ask.

God hold it, to your honour's good content! Gramercy, fellow: there, drink that for me.

Throws him his purse God save your lordship! Well met, my lord, I am glad to see your honour.

I am in your debt for your last exercise, Come the next Sabbath, and I will content you.

He whispers in his ear What, talking with a priest, lord chamberlain? Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest, Your honour hath no shriving work in hand.

Good faith, and when I met this holy man, Those men you talk of came into my mind.

What, go you toward the Tower? I do, my lord, but long I shall not stay I shall return before your lordship thence.

Sir Richard Ratcliff, let me tell thee this: To-day shalt thou behold a subject die For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.

God keep the prince from all the pack of you! A knot you are of damned blood-suckers! You live that shall cry woe for this after.

Now Margaret's curse is fall'n upon our heads, For standing by when Richard stabb'd her son.

Then cursed she Hastings, then cursed she Buckingham, Then cursed she Richard.

O, remember, God To hear her prayers for them, as now for us And for my sister and her princely sons, Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood, Which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt.

Come, Grey, come, Vaughan, let us all embrace: And take our leave, until we meet in heaven.

My lords, at once: the cause why we are met Is, to determine of the coronation.

In God's name, speak: when is the royal day? Are all things fitting for that royal time? It is, and wants but nomination.

Who knows the lord protector's mind herein? Who is most inward with the royal duke? Your grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.

Who, I, my lord I we know each other's faces, But for our hearts, he knows no more of mine, Than I of yours, Nor I no more of his, than you of mine.

I thank his grace, I know he loves me well, But, for his purpose in the coronation.

I have been long a sleeper, but, I hope, My absence doth neglect no great designs, Which by my presence might have been concluded.

Had not you come upon your cue, my lord William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part,-- I mean, your voice,--for crowning of the king.

Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder, His lordship knows me well, and loves me well.

My lord of Ely! My lord? When I was last in Holborn, I saw good strawberries in your garden there I do beseech you send for some of them.

To-morrow, in mine opinion, is too sudden, For I myself am not so well provided As else I would be, were the day prolong'd.

I think there's never a man in Christendom That can less hide his love or hate than he, For by his face straight shall you know his heart.

What of his heart perceive you in his face By any likelihood he show'd to-day? Marry, that with no man here he is offended, For, were he, he had shown it in his looks.

Lovel and Ratcliff, look that it be done: The rest, that love me, rise and follow me.

Woe, woe for England! not a whit for me, For I, too fond, might have prevented this.

O Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse Is lighted on poor Hastings' wretched head! Dispatch, my lord, the duke would be at dinner: Make a short shrift, he longs to see your head.

O bloody Richard! miserable England! I prophesy the fearful'st time to thee That ever wretched age hath look'd upon.

But what, is Catesby gone? He is, and, see, he brings the mayor along.

Lord mayor,-- Look to the drawbridge there! Hark! a drum.

Lord mayor, the reason we have sent-- Look back, defend thee, here are enemies.

God and our innocency defend and guard us! Be patient, they are friends, Ratcliff and Lovel.

Here is the head of that ignoble traitor, The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.

Well, well, he was the covert'st shelter'd traitor That ever lived.

I never look'd for better at his hands, After he once fell in with Mistress Shore.

And to that end we wish'd your lord-ship here, To avoid the carping censures of the world.

But since you come too late of our intents, Yet witness what you hear we did intend: And so, my good lord mayor, we bid farewell.

Fear not, my lord, I'll play the orator As if the golden fee for which I plead Were for myself: and so, my lord, adieu.

If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard's Castle, Where you shall find me well accompanied With reverend fathers and well-learned bishops.

I go: and towards three or four o'clock Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.

Go, Lovel, with all speed to Doctor Shaw, To CATESBY Go thou to Friar Penker, bid them both Meet me within this hour at Baynard's Castle.

Now will I in, to take some privy order, To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight, And to give notice, that no manner of person At any time have recourse unto the princes.

This is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings, Which in a set hand fairly is engross'd, That it may be this day read over in Paul's.

How now, my lord, what say the citizens? Now, by the holy mother of our Lord, The citizens are mum and speak not a word.

Which when I saw, I reprehended them, And ask'd the mayor what meant this wilful silence: His answer was, the people were not wont To be spoke to but by the recorder.

Then he was urged to tell my tale again, 'Thus saith the duke, thus hath the duke inferr'd,' But nothing spake in warrant from himself.

What tongueless blocks were they! would not they speak? No, by my troth, my lord.

I go, and if you plead as well for them As I can say nay to thee for myself, No doubt well bring it to a happy issue.

Welcome my lord, I dance attendance here, I think the duke will not be spoke withal.

Marry, God forbid his grace should say us nay! I fear he will.

Sorry I am my noble cousin should Suspect me, that I mean no good to him: By heaven, I come in perfect love to him, And so once more return and tell his grace.

When holy and devout religious men Are at their beads, 'tis hard to draw them thence, So sweet is zealous contemplation.

See, where he stands between two clergymen! Two props of virtue for a Christian prince, To stay him from the fall of vanity: And, see, a book of prayer in his hand, True ornaments to know a holy man.

Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince, Lend favourable ears to our request, And pardon us the interruption Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.

My lord, there needs no such apology: I rather do beseech you pardon me, Who, earnest in the service of my God, Neglect the visitation of my friends.

But, leaving this, what is your grace's pleasure? Even that, I hope, which pleaseth God above, And all good men of this ungovern'd isle.

I do suspect I have done some offence That seems disgracious in the city's eyes, And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.

For this, consorted with the citizens, Your very worshipful and loving friends, And by their vehement instigation, In this just suit come I to move your grace.

I know not whether to depart in silence, Or bitterly to speak in your reproof.

Therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first, And then, in speaking, not to incur the last, Definitively thus I answer you.

Your love deserves my thanks, but my desert Unmeritable shuns your high request.

More bitterly could I expostulate, Save that, for reverence to some alive, I give a sparing limit to my tongue.

O, make them joyful, grant their lawful suit! Alas, why would you heap these cares on me? I am unfit for state and majesty, I do beseech you, take it not amiss, I cannot nor I will not yield to you.

Would you enforce me to a world of care? Well, call them again.

kind entreats, Albeit against my conscience and my soul.

Then I salute you with this kingly title: Long live Richard, England's royal king! To-morrow will it please you to be crown'd? Even when you please, since you will have it so.

To-morrow, then, we will attend your grace: And so most joyfully we take our leave.

Who m eets us here?  my niece Plantagenet Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester? Now, for my life, she's wandering to the Tower, On pure heart's love to greet the tender princes.

Master lieutenant, pray you, by your leave, How doth the prince, and my young son of York? Right well, dear madam.

By your patience, I may not suffer you to visit them, The king hath straitly charged the contrary.

The king! why, who's that? I cry you mercy: I mean the lord protector.

The Lord protect him from that kingly title! Hath he set bounds betwixt their love and me? I am their mother, who should keep me from them? I am their fathers mother, I will see them.

Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother: Then bring me to their sights, I'll bear thy blame And take thy office from thee, on my peril.

No, madam, no, I may not leave it so: I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.

Let me but meet you, ladies, one hour hence, And I'll salute your grace of York as mother, And reverend looker on, of two fair queens.

To LADY ANNE Come, madam, you must straight to Westminster, There to be crowned Richard's royal queen.

Take all the swift advantage of the hours, You shall have letters from me to my son To meet you on the way, and welcome you.

O ill-dispersing wind of misery! O my accursed womb, the bed of death! A cockatrice hast thou hatch'd to the world, Whose unavoided eye is murderous.

Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick, And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.

Enter KING RICHARD III, in pomp, crowned, BUCKINGHAM, CATESBY, a page, and others Stand all apart Cousin of Buckingham! My gracious sovereign? Give me thy hand.

Why, Buckingham, I say, I would be king, Why, so you are, my thrice renowned liege.

O bitter consequence, That Edward still should live! 'True, noble prince!' Cousin, thou wert not wont to be so dull: Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead, And I would have it suddenly perform'd.

I will converse with iron-witted fools And unrespective boys: none are for me That look into me with considerate eyes: High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.

Stands apart My lord? Rumour it abroad That Anne, my wife, is sick and like to die: I will take order for her keeping close.

Inquire me out some mean-born gentleman, Whom I will marry straight to Clarence' daughter: The boy is foolish, and I fear not him.

Look, how thou dream'st! I say again, give out That Anne my wife is sick and like to die: About it, for it stands me much upon, To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.

I must be married to my brother's daughter, Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.

Murder her brothers, and then marry her! Uncertain way of gain! But I am in So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin: Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.

Re-enter Page, with TYRREL Is thy name Tyrrel? James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.

Art thou, indeed? Prove me, my gracious sovereign.

Darest thou resolve to kill a friend of mine? Ay, my lord, But I had rather kill two enemies.

Why, there thou hast it: two deep enemies, Foes to my rest and my sweet sleep's disturbers Are they that I would have thee deal upon: Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.

Let me have open means to come to them, And soon I'll rid you from the fear of them.

Hark, come hither, Tyrrel Go, by this token: rise, and lend thine ear: There is no more but so: say it is done, And I will love thee, and prefer thee too.

Shall we hear from thee, Tyrrel, ere we sleep? Ye shall, my Lord.

Re-enter BUCKINGHAM My Lord, I have consider'd in my mind The late demand that you did sound me in.

Dorset is fled to Richmond. I hear that news, my lord.

My lord, I claim your gift, my due by promise, For which your honour and your faith is pawn'd, The earldom of Hereford and the moveables The which you promised I should possess.

Stanley, look to your wife, if she convey Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.

What says your highness to my just demand? As I remember, Henry the Sixth Did prophesy that Richmond should be king, When Richmond was a little peevish boy.

My Lord! Ay, what's o'clock? I am thus bold to put your grace in mind Of what you promised me.

Why let it strike? Because that, like a Jack, thou keep'st the stroke Betwixt thy begging and my meditation.

The most arch of piteous massacre That ever yet this land was guilty of.

Thus both are gone with conscience and remorse, They could not speak, and so I left them both, To bring this tidings to the bloody king.

All hail, my sovereign liege! Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news? If to have done the thing you gave in charge Beget your happiness, be happy then, For it is done, my lord.

And buried, gentle Tyrrel? The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them, But how or in what place I do not know.

Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after supper, And thou shalt tell the process of their death.

Meantime, but think how I may do thee good, And be inheritor of thy desire.

The son of Clarence have I pent up close, His daughter meanly have I match'd in marriage, The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom, And Anne my wife hath bid the world good night.

Now, for I know the Breton Richmond aims At young Elizabeth, my brother's daughter, And, by that knot, looks proudly o'er the crown, To her I go, a jolly thriving wooer.

My lord! Good news or bad, that thou comest in so bluntly? Bad news, my lord: Ely is fled to Richmond, And Buckingham, back'd with the hardy Welshmen, Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.

Ely with Richmond troubles me more near Than Buckingham and his rash-levied army.

So, now prosperity begins to mellow And drop into the rotten mouth of death.

Here in these confines slily have I lurk'd, To watch the waning of mine adversaries.

A dire induction am I witness to, And will to France, hoping the consequence Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical.

So many miseries have crazed my voice, That my woe-wearied tongue is mute and dumb, Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead? Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet.

Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambs, And throw them in the entrails of the wolf? When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done? When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.

O, who hath any cause to mourn but I? Sitting down by her If ancient sorrow be most reverend, Give mine the benefit of seniory, And let my woes frown on the upper hand.

Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard kill'd him.

Bear with me, I am hungry for revenge, And now I cloy me with beholding it.

Thus hath the course of justice wheel'd about, And left thee but a very prey to time, Having no more but thought of what thou wert, To torture thee the more, being what thou art.

Farewell, York's wife, and queen of sad mischance: These English woes will make me smile in France.

My words are dull, O, quicken them with thine! Thy woes will make them sharp, and pierce like mine.

And in the breath of bitter words let's smother My damned son, which thy two sweet sons smother'd.

Alarums Either be patient, and entreat me fair, Or with the clamorous report of war Thus will I drown your exclamations.

Art thou my son? Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.

Madam, I have a touch of your condition, Which cannot brook the accent of reproof.

Art thou so hasty? I have stay'd for thee, God knows, in anguish, pain and agony.

And came I not at last to comfort you? No, by the holy rood, thou know'st it well, Thou camest on earth to make the earth my hell.

If I be so disgracious in your sight, Let me march on, and not offend your grace.

Hear me a word, For I shall never speak to thee again.

Either thou wilt die, by God's just ordinance, Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror, Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish And never look upon thy face again.

Bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end, Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.

Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse Abides in me, I say amen to all.

I have no more sons of the royal blood For thee to murder: for my daughters, Richard, They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens, And therefore level not to hit their lives.

You have a daughter call'd Elizabeth, Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.

True, when avoided grace makes destiny: My babes were destined to a fairer death, If grace had bless'd thee with a fairer life.

Cousins, indeed, and by their uncle cozen'd Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life.

Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads? No, to the dignity and height of honour The high imperial type of this earth's glory.

Be brief, lest that be process of thy kindness Last longer telling than thy kindness' date.

What do you think? That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul: So from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers, And from my heart's love I do thank thee for it.

Be not so hasty to confound my meaning: I mean, that with my soul I love thy daughter, And mean to make her queen of England.

And wilt thou learn of me? Madam, with all my heart.

Come, come, you mock me, this is not the way To win our daughter.

There is no other way Unless thou couldst put on some other shape, And not be Richard that hath done all this.

Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee, Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.

Look, what is done cannot be now amended: Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes, Which after hours give leisure to repent.

If I did take the kingdom from your sons, To make amends, Ill give it to your daughter.

Your children were vexation to your youth, But mine shall be a comfort to your age.

The loss you have is but a son being king, And by that loss your daughter is made queen.

I cannot make you what amends I would, Therefore accept such kindness as I can.

Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother, Again shall you be mother to a king, And all the ruins of distressful times Repair'd with double riches of content.

But how long shall that title 'ever' last? Sweetly in force unto her fair life's end.

But how long fairly shall her sweet lie last? So long as heaven and nature lengthens it.

O no, my reasons are too deep and dead, Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their grave.

Harp on it still shall I till heart-strings break.

Now, by my George, my garter, and my crown,-- Profaned, dishonour'd, and the third usurp'd.

I swear-- By nothing, for this is no oath: The George, profaned, hath lost his holy honour, The garter, blemish'd, pawn'd his knightly virtue, The crown, usurp'd, disgraced his kingly glory.

if something thou wilt swear to be believed, Swear then by something that thou hast not wrong'd.

My father's death-- Thy life hath that dishonour'd.

That thou hast wronged in the time o'erpast, For I myself have many tears to wash Hereafter time, for time past wrong'd by thee.

The children live, whose parents thou hast Ungovern'd youth, to wail it in their age, The parents live, whose children thou hast butcher'd, Old wither'd plants, to wail it with their age.

Swear not by time to come, for that thou hast Misused ere used, by time misused o'erpast.

Shall I be tempted of the devil thus? Ay, if the devil tempt thee to do good.

Shall I forget myself to be myself? Ay, if yourself's remembrance wrong yourself.

But in your daughter's womb I bury them: Where in that nest of spicery they shall breed Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.

Shall I go win my daughter to thy will? And be a happy mother by the deed.

Write to me very shortly. And you shall understand from me her mind.

Some light-foot friend post to the Duke of Norfolk: Ratcliff, thyself, or Catesby, where is he? Here, my lord.

O, true, good Catesby: bid him levy straight The greatest strength and power he can make, And meet me presently at Salisbury.

What is't your highness' pleasure I shall do at Why, what wouldst thou do there before I go? Your highness told me I should post before.

How now, what news with you? None good, my lord, to please you with the hearing, Nor none so bad, but it may well be told.

Hoyday, a riddle! neither good nor bad! Why dost thou run so many mile about, When thou mayst tell thy tale a nearer way? Once more, what news? Richmond is on the seas.

There let him sink, and be the seas on him! White-liver'd runagate, what doth he there? I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.

Well, sir, as you guess, as you guess? Stirr'd up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Ely, He makes for England, there to claim the crown.

Unless for that he comes to be your liege, You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.

Where is thy power, then, to beat him back? Where are thy tenants and thy followers? Are they not now upon the western shore.

Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships! No, my good lord, my friends are in the north.

thou wouldst be gone to join with Richmond: I will not trust you, sir.

Most mighty sovereign, You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful: I never was nor never will be false.

Go muster men, but, hear you, leave behind Your son, George Stanley: look your faith be firm.

My liege, in Kent the Guildfords are in arms, And every hour more competitors Flock to their aid, and still their power increaseth.

My lord, the army of the Duke of Buckingham-- Out on you, owls! nothing but songs of death? He striketh him Take that, until thou bring me better news.

The news I have to tell your majesty Is, that by sudden floods and fall of waters, Buckingham's army is dispersed and scatter'd, And he himself wander'd away alone, No man knows whither.

I cry thee mercy: There is my purse to cure that blow of thine.

Hath any well-advised friend proclaim'd Reward to him that brings the traitor in? Such proclamation hath been made, my liege.

Sir Thomas Lovel and Lord Marquis Dorset, 'Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms.

Upon his party: he, mistrusting them, Hoisted sail and made away for Brittany.

March on, march on, since we are up in arms, If not to fight with foreign enemies, Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.

Re-enter CATESBY My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken, That is the best news: that the Earl of Richmond Is with a mighty power landed at Milford, Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.

Away towards Salisbury! while we reason here, A royal battle might be won and lost Some one take order Buckingham be brought To Salisbury, the rest march on with me.

But, tell me, where is princely Richmond now? At Pembroke, or at Harford-west, in Wales.

Return unto thy lord, commend me to him: Tell him the queen hath heartily consented He shall espouse Elizabeth her daughter.

Farewell. Will not King Richard let me speak with him? No, my good lord, therefore be patient.

Come, sirs, convey me to the block of shame, Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.

In God's name, cheerly on, courageous friends, To reap the harvest of perpetual peace By this one bloody trial of sharp war.

Every man's conscience is a thousand swords, To fight against that bloody homicide.

Then, in God's name, march: True hope is swift, and flies with swallow's wings: Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.

Here pitch our tents, even here in Bosworth field.

My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad? My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.

Norfolk, we must have knocks, ha! must we not? We must both give and take, my gracious lord.

Up with my tent there! here will I lie tonight, But where to-morrow?  Well, all's one for that.

Who hath descried the number of the foe? Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.

Why, our battalion trebles that account: Besides, the king's name is a tower of strength, Which they upon the adverse party want.

Up with my tent there! Valiant gentlemen, Let us survey the vantage of the field Call for some men of sound direction Let's want no discipline, make no delay, For, lords, to-morrow is a busy day.

The weary sun hath made a golden set, And by the bright track of his fiery car, Gives signal, of a goodly day to-morrow.

Give me some ink and paper in my tent I'll draw the form and model of our battle, Limit each leader to his several charge, And part in just proportion our small strength.

My Lord of Oxford, you, Sir William Brandon, And you, Sir Walter Herbert, stay with me.

If without peril it be possible, Good Captain Blunt, bear my good-night to him, And give him from me this most needful scroll.

Upon my life, my lord, I'll under-take it, And so, God give you quiet rest to-night! Good night, good Captain Blunt.

Come gentlemen, Let us consult upon to-morrow's business In to our tent, the air is raw and cold.

They withdraw into the tent What is't o'clock? It's supper-time, my lord, It's nine o'clock.

What, is my beaver easier than it was? And all my armour laid into my tent? If is, my liege, and all things are in readiness.

Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge, Use careful watch, choose trusty sentinels.

My lord? Send out a pursuivant at arms To Stanley's regiment, bid him bring his power Before sunrising, lest his son George fall Into the blind cave of eternal night.

Give me a watch. Saddle white Surrey for the field to-morrow.

My lord? Saw'st thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland? Thomas the Earl of Surrey, and himself, Much about cock-shut time, from troop to troop Went through the army, cheering up the soldiers.

Give me a bowl of wine: I have not that alacrity of spirit, Nor cheer of mind, that I was wont to have.

Ratcliff, about the mid of night come to my tent And help to arm me.

The silent hours steal on, And flaky darkness breaks within the east.

In brief,--for so the season bids us be,-- Prepare thy battle early in the morning, And put thy fortune to the arbitrement Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.

The Ghosts vanish KING RICHARD III starts out of his dream Give me another horse: bind up my wounds.

O coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me! The lights burn blue.

It is now dead midnight. Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.

What do I fear?  myself?  there's none else by: Richard loves Richard, that is, I am I.

What, from myself?   Great reason why: Lest I revenge.

I love myself. Wherefore?  for any good That I myself have done unto myself? O, no! alas, I rather hate myself For hateful deeds committed by myself! I am a villain: yet I lie.

I am not. Fool, of thyself speak well: fool, do not flatter.

My conscience hath a thousand several tongues, And every tongue brings in a several tale, And every tale condemns me for a villain.

Perjury, perjury, in the high'st degree Murder, stem murder, in the direst degree, All several sins, all used in each degree, Throng to the bar, crying all, Guilty! guilty! I shall despair.

My lord! 'Zounds! who is there? Ratcliff, my lord, 'tis I.

The early village-cock Hath twice done salutation to the morn, Your friends are up, and buckle on their armour.

O Ratcliff, I have dream'd a fearful dream! What thinkest thou, will our friends prove all true? No doubt, my lord.

O Ratcliff, I fear, I fear,-- Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.

By the apostle Paul, shadows to-night Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers Armed in proof, and led by shallow Richmond.

Come, go with me, Under our tents I'll play the eaves-dropper, To see if any mean to shrink from me.

Good morrow, Richmond! Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen, That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.

How have you slept, my lord? The sweetest sleep, and fairest-boding dreams That ever enter'd in a drowsy head, Have I since your departure had, my lords.

Methought their souls, whose bodies Richard murder'd, Came to my tent, and cried on victory: I promise you, my soul is very jocund In the remembrance of so fair a dream.

How far into the morning is it, lords? Upon the stroke of four.

Then, in the name of God and all these rights, Advance your standards, draw your willing swords.

For me, the ransom of my bold attempt Shall be this cold corpse on the earth's cold face, But if I thrive, the gain of my attempt The least of you shall share his part thereof.

He said the truth: and what said Surrey then? He smiled and said 'The better for our purpose.

Give me a calendar. Who saw the sun to-day? Not I, my lord.

Then he disdains to shine, for by the book He should have braved the east an hour ago A black day will it be to somebody.

Ratcliff! My lord? The sun will not be seen to-day, The sky doth frown and lour upon our army.

Not shine to-day! Why, what is that to me More than to Richmond?  for the selfsame heaven That frowns on me looks sadly upon him.

They thus directed, we will follow In the main battle, whose puissance on either side Shall be well winged with our chiefest horse.

This, and Saint George to boot! What think'st thou, Norfolk? A good direction, warlike sovereign.

He sheweth him a paper 'Jockey of Norfolk, be not too bold, For Dickon thy master is bought and sold.

March on, join bravely, let us to't pell-mell If not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell.

You sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest, You having lands, and blest with beauteous wives, They would restrain the one, distain the other.

Shall these enjoy our lands?  lie with our wives? Ravish our daughters? Drum afar off Hark! I hear their drum.

Off with his son George's head! My lord, the enemy is past the marsh After the battle let George Stanley die.

Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost! Alarums.

Enter KING RICHARD III A horse! a horse! my kingdom for a horse! Withdraw, my lord, I'll help you to a horse.

Slave, I have set my life upon a cast, And I will stand the hazard of the die: I think there be six Richmonds in the field, Five have I slain to-day instead of him.

Lo, here, this long-usurped royalty From the dead temples of this bloody wretch Have I pluck'd off, to grace thy brows withal: Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.

Great God of heaven, say Amen to all! But, tell me, is young George Stanley living? He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town, Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.

What men of name are slain on either side? John Duke of Norfolk, Walter Lord Ferrers, Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.

From forth the fatal loins of these two foes A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life, Whose misadventured piteous overthrows Do with their death bury their parents' strife.

Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the collar.

To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand: therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.

A dog of that house shall move me to stand: I will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.

That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall.

True, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push Montague's men from the wall, and thrust his maids to the wall.

The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.

'Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I have fought with the men, I will be cruel with the maids, and cut off their heads.

The heads of the maids? Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads, take it in what sense thou wilt.

Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and 'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.

'Tis well thou art not fish, if thou hadst, thou hadst been poor John.

Draw thy tool! here comes two of the house of the Montagues.

My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee.

No, marry, I fear thee! Let us take the law of our sides, let them begin.

I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.

I will bite my thumb at them, which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it.

Do you bite your thumb at us, sir? I do bite my thumb, sir.

Do you bite your thumb at us, sir? No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I bite my thumb, sir.

If you do, sir, I am for you: I serve as good a man as you.

Say 'better:' here comes one of my master's kinsmen.

Gregory, remember thy swashing blow. They fight Part, fools! Put up your swords, you know not what you do.

Beats down their swords What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds? Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death.

I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword, Or manage it to part these men with me.

O, where is Romeo? saw you him to-day? Right glad I am he was not at this fray.

Many a morning hath he there been seen, With tears augmenting the fresh morning dew.

My noble uncle, do you know the cause? I neither know it nor can learn of him.

See, where he comes: so please you, step aside, I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.

I would thou wert so happy by thy stay, To hear true shrift.

Was that my father that went hence so fast? It was.

What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours? Not having that, which, having, makes them short.

In love? Of love? Out of her favour, where I am in love.

Good heart, at what? At thy good heart's oppression.

Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast, Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest With more of thine: this love that thou hast shown Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.

Soft! I will go along, An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.

Tut, I have lost myself, I am not here, This is not Romeo, he's some other where.

What, shall I groan and tell thee? Groan! why, no.

Bid a sick man in sadness make his will: Ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill! In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.

Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hit With Cupid's arrow, she hath Dian's wit, And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd, From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.

Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste? She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste, For beauty starved with her severity Cuts beauty off from all posterity.

She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair, To merit bliss by making me despair: She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow Do I live dead that live to tell it now.

By giving liberty unto thine eyes, Examine other beauties.

But Montague is bound as well as I, In penalty alike, and 'tis not hard, I think, For men so old as we to keep the peace.

Of honourable reckoning are you both, And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long.

This night I hold an old accustom'd feast, Whereto I have invited many a guest, Such as I love, and you, among the store, One more, most welcome, makes my number more.

To Servant, giving a paper Go, sirrah, trudge about Through fair Verona, find those persons out Whose names are written there, and to them say, My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.

Why, Romeo, art thou mad? Not mad, but bound more than a mad-man is, Shut up in prison, kept without my food, Whipp'd and tormented and--God-den, good fellow.

I pray, sir, can you read? Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.

Perhaps you have learned it without book: but, I pray, can you read any thing you see? Ay, if I know the letters and the language.

Ye say honestly: rest you merry! Stay, fellow, I can read.

A fair assembly: whither should they come? To supper, to our house.

Now I'll tell you without asking: my master is the great rich Capulet, and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray, come and crush a cup of wine.

I'll go along, no such sight to be shown, But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.

Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old, I bade her come.

What, lamb! what, ladybird! God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet! How now! who calls? Your mother.

What is your will? This is the matter:--Nurse, give leave awhile, We must talk in secret:--nurse, come back again, I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel.

I'll lay fourteen of my teeth,-- And yet, to my teeth be it spoken, I have but four-- She is not fourteen.

How long is it now To Lammas-tide? A fortnight and odd days.

Even or odd, of all days in the year, Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen.

To see, now, how a jest shall come about! I warrant, an I should live a thousand years, I never should forget it: 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he, And, pretty fool, it stinted and said 'Ay.

Yes, madam: yet I cannot choose but laugh, To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.

God mark thee to his grace! Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed: An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.

Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme I came to talk of.

Tell me, daughter Juliet, How stands your disposition to be married? It is an honour that I dream not of.

An honour! were not I thine only nurse, I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.

Well, think of marriage now, younger than you, Here in Verona, ladies of esteem, Are made already mothers: by my count, I was your mother much upon these years That you are now a maid.

Thus then in brief: The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.

A man, young lady! lady, such a man As all the world--why, he's a man of wax.

Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love? I'll look to like, if looking liking move: But no more deep will I endart mine eye Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in the pantry, and every thing in extremity.

I must hence to wait, I beseech you, follow straight.

Give me a torch: I am not for this ambling, Being but heavy, I will bear the light.

Not I, believe me: you have dancing shoes With nimble soles: I have a soul of lead So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

You are a lover, borrow Cupid's wings, And soar with them above a common bound.

I am too sore enpierced with his shaft To soar with his light feathers, and so bound, I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe: Under love's heavy burden do I sink.

And, to sink in it, should you burden love, Too great oppression for a tender thing.

Is love a tender thing? it is too rough, Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.

If love be rough with you, be rough with love, Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.

Give me a case to put my visage in: A visor for a visor! what care I What curious eye doth quote deformities? Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.

Come, knock and enter, and no sooner in, But every man betake him to his legs.

A torch for me: let wantons light of heart Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels, For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase, I'll be a candle-holder, and look on.

Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word: If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st Up to the ears.

I mean, sir, in delay We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.

Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits Five times in that ere once in our five wits.

And we mean well in going to this mask, But 'tis no wit to go.

This wind, you talk of, blows us from ourselves, Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

But He, that hath the steerage of my course, Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen.

Away with the joint-stools, remove the court-cupboard, look to the plate.

Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane, and, as thou lovest me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.

You are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.

Cheerly, boys, be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.

Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes Unplagued with corns will have a bout with you.

Music plays, and they dance More light, you knaves, and turn the tables up, And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.

Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet, For you and I are past our dancing days: How long is't now since last yourself and I Were in a mask? By'r lady, thirty years.

What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much: 'Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio, Come pentecost as quickly as it will, Some five and twenty years, and then we mask'd.

'Tis more, 'tis more, his son is elder, sir, His son is thirty.

Will you tell me that? His son was but a ward two years ago.

enrich the hand Of yonder knight? I know not, sir.

The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand, And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.

Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight! For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.

What dares the slave Come hither, cover'd with an antic face, To fleer and scorn at our solemnity? Now, by the stock and honour of my kin, To strike him dead, I hold it not a sin.

Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so? Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe, A villain that is hither come in spite, To scorn at our solemnity this night.

It fits, when such a villain is a guest: I'll not endure him.

He shall be endured: What, goodman boy! I say, he shall: go to, Am I the master here, or you? go to.

You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul! You'll make a mutiny among my guests! You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man! Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.

Go to, go to, You are a saucy boy: is't so, indeed? This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what: You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time.

Well said, my hearts! You are a princox, go: Be quiet, or--More light, more light! For shame! I'll make you quiet.

What, cheerly, my hearts! Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.

I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall.

This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this: My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.

Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, Which mannerly devotion shows in this, For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch, And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.

Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too? Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.

O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do, They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.

Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.

Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged! Give me my sin again.

Is she a Capulet? O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.

Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone, We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.

Is it e'en so? why, then, I thank you all I thank you, honest gentlemen, good night.

Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late: I'll to my rest.

What is yond gentleman? The son and heir of old Tiberio.

What's he that now is going out of door? Marry, that, I think, be young Petrucio.

What's he that follows there, that would not dance? I know not.

His name is Romeo, and a Montague, The only son of your great enemy.

My only love sprung from my only hate! Too early seen unknown, and known too late! Prodigious birth of love it is to me, That I must love a loathed enemy.

What's this? what's this? A rhyme I learn'd even now Of one I danced withal.

Anon, anon! Come, let's away, the strangers all are gone.

Now old desire doth in his death-bed lie, And young affection gapes to be his heir, That fair for which love groan'd for and would die, With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.

Can I go forward when my heart is here? Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.

He climbs the wall, and leaps down within it Romeo! my cousin Romeo! He is wise, And, on my lie, hath stol'n him home to bed.

He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard wall: Call, good Mercutio.

Come, he hath hid himself among these trees, To be consorted with the humorous night: Blind is his love and best befits the dark.

Now will he sit under a medlar tree, And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit As maids call medlars, when they laugh alone.

JULIET appears above at a window But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks? It is the east, and Juliet is the sun.

It is my lady, O, it is my love! O, that she knew she were! She speaks yet she says nothing: what of that? Her eye discourses, I will answer it.

I am too bold, 'tis not to me she speaks: Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven, Having some business, do entreat her eyes To twinkle in their spheres till they return.

O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo? Deny thy father and refuse thy name, Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love, And I'll no longer be a Capulet.

'Tis but thy name that is my enemy, Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.

What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot, Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part Belonging to a man.

Romeo, doff thy name, And for that name which is no part of thee Take all myself.

I take thee at thy word: Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized, Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound: Art thou not Romeo and a Montague? Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.

How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore? The orchard walls are high and hard to climb, And the place death, considering who thou art, If any of my kinsmen find thee here.

With love's light wings did I o'er-perch these walls, For stony limits cannot hold love out, And what love can do that dares love attempt, Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.

Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye Than twenty of their swords: look thou but sweet, And I am proof against their enmity.

I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight, And but thou love me, let them find me here: My life were better ended by their hate, Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

By whose direction found'st thou out this place? By love, who first did prompt me to inquire, He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes.

I am no pilot, yet, wert thou as far As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea, I would adventure for such merchandise.

O gentle Romeo, If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully: Or if thou think'st I am too quickly won, I'll frown and be perverse an say thee nay, So thou wilt woo, but else, not for the world.

In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond, And therefore thou mayst think my 'havior light: But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true Than those that have more cunning to be strange.

What shall I swear by? Do not swear at all, Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self, Which is the god of my idolatry, And I'll believe thee.

Sweet, good night! This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath, May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.

I gave thee mine before thou didst request it: And yet I would it were to give again.

Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love? But to be frank, and give it thee again.

And yet I wish but for the thing I have: My bounty is as boundless as the sea, My love as deep, the more I give to thee, The more I have, for both are infinite.

Nurse calls within I hear some noise within, dear love, adieu! Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.

Being in night, all this is but a dream, Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.

Re-enter JULIET, above Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.

-But if thou mean'st not well, I do beseech thee-- By and by, I come:-- To cease thy suit, and leave me to my grief: To-morrow will I send.

So thrive my soul-- A thousand times good night! A thousand times the worse, to want thy light.

Love goes toward love, as schoolboys from their books, But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.

I shall forget, to have thee still stand there, Remembering how I love thy company.

And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget, Forgetting any other home but this.

Sweet, so would I: Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.

Good night, good night! parting is such sweet sorrow, That I shall say good night till it be morrow.

Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast! Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest! Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell, His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.

Within the infant rind of this small flower Poison hath residence and medicine power: For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part, Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.

Two such opposed kings encamp them still In man as well as herbs, grace and rude will, And where the worser is predominant, Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline? With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no, I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.

That's my good son: but where hast thou been, then? I'll tell thee, ere thou ask it me again.

Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift, Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here! Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear, So soon forsaken? young men's love then lies Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.

Not in a grave, To lay one in, another out to have.

I pray thee, chide not, she whom I love now Doth grace for grace and love for love allow, The other did not so.

O, she knew well Thy love did read by rote and could not spell.

But come, young waverer, come, go with me, In one respect I'll thy assistant be, For this alliance may so happy prove, To turn your households' rancour to pure love.

Where the devil should this Romeo be? Came he not home to-night? Not to his father's, I spoke with his man.

Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline.

Tybalt, the kinsman of old Capulet, Hath sent a letter to his father's house.

Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being dared.

Signior Romeo, bon jour! there's a French salutation to your French slop.

What counterfeit did I give you? The ship, sir, the slip, can you not conceive? Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great, and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.

That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.

Well said: follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing sole singular.

O single-soled jest, solely singular for the Come between us, good Benvolio, my wits faint.

Switch and spurs, switch and spurs, or I'll cry a match.

Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting, it is a most sharp sauce.

Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.

O, thou art deceived, I would have made it short: for I was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.

Here's goodly gear! A sail, a sail! Two, two, a shirt and a smock.

Good Peter, to hide her face, for her fan's the fairer face.

Is it good den? 'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.

Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith, wisely, wisely.

if you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with She will indite him to some supper.

A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho! What hast thou found? No hare, sir, unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.

An old hare hoar, And an old hare hoar, Is very good meat in lent But a hare that is hoar Is too much for a score, When it hoars ere it be spent.

Romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll to dinner, thither.

Farewell, ancient lady, farewell, 'lady, lady, lady.

An a' speak any thing against me, I'll take him down, an a' were lustier than he is, and twenty such Jacks, and if I cannot, I'll find those that shall.

Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills, I am none of his skains-mates.

Now, afore God, I am so vexed, that every part about me quivers.

I protest unto thee-- Good heart, and, i' faith, I will tell her as much: Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.

What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me.

I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.

Bid her devise Some means to come to shrift this afternoon, And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell Be shrived and married.

Farewell, be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains: Farewell, commend me to thy mistress.

What say'st thou, my dear nurse? Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say, Two may keep counsel, putting one away? I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.

I anger her sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer man, but, I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world.

Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter? Ay, nurse, what of that? both with an R.

mocker! that's the dog's name, R is for the--No, I know it begins with some other letter:--and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.

The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse, In half an hour she promised to return.

Now is the sun upon the highmost hill Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve Is three long hours, yet she is not come.

O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news? Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

Now, good sweet nurse,--O Lord, why look'st thou sad? Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily, If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news By playing it to me with so sour a face.

I am a-weary, give me leave awhile: Fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunt have I had! I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news: Nay, come, I pray thee, speak, good, good nurse, speak.

What, have you dined at home? No, no: but all this did I know before.

What says he of our marriage? what of that? Lord, how my head aches! what a head have I! It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.

My back o' t' other side,--O, my back, my back! Beshrew your heart for sending me about, To catch my death with jaunting up and down! I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.

Here's such a coil! come, what says Romeo? Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day? I have.

Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell, There stays a husband to make you a wife: Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks, They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.

Here comes the lady: O, so light a foot Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint: A lover may bestride the gossamer That idles in the wanton summer air, And yet not fall, so light is vanity.

Come, come with me, and we will make short work, For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone Till holy church incorporate two in one.

I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire: The day is hot, the Capulets abroad, And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl, For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.

Am I like such a fellow? Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.

And what to? Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other.

The fee-simple! O simple! By my head, here come the Capulets.

And but one word with one of us? couple it with something, make it a word and a blow.

You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me occasion.

'Zounds, consort! We talk here in the public haunt of men: Either withdraw unto some private place, And reason coldly of your grievances, Or else depart, here all eyes gaze on us.

Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze, I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.

But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery: Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower, Your worship in that sense may call him 'man.

Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford No better term than this,--thou art a villain.

Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee Doth much excuse the appertaining rage To such a greeting: villain am I none, Therefore farewell, I see thou know'st me not.

Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries That thou hast done me, therefore turn and draw.

O calm, dishonourable, vile submission! Alla stoccata carries it away.

Will you pluck your sword out of his pitcher by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.

They fight Draw, Benvolio, beat down their weapons.

Is he gone, and hath nothing? What, art thou hurt? Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch, marry, 'tis enough.

No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church-door, but 'tis enough,'twill serve: ask for me to-morrow, and you shall find me a grave man.

Help me into some house, Benvolio, Or I shall faint.

This day's black fate on more days doth depend, This but begins the woe, others must end.

Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here, Shalt with him hence.

They fight, TYBALT falls Romeo, away, be gone! The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.

Up, sir, go with me, I charge thee in the princes name, obey.

Where are the vile beginners of this fray? O noble prince, I can discover all The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl: There lies the man, slain by young Romeo, That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.

Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child! O prince! O cousin! husband! O, the blood is spilt O my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true, For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.

He is a kinsman to the Montague, Affection makes him false, he speaks not true: Some twenty of them fought in this black strife, And all those twenty could but kill one life.

I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give, Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.

Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio, Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe? Not Romeo, prince, he was Mercutio's friend, His fault concludes but what the law should end, The life of Tybalt.

Bear hence this body and attend our will: Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.

Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds, Towards Phoebus' lodging: such a wagoner As Phaethon would whip you to the west, And bring in cloudy night immediately.

Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night, That runaway's eyes may wink and Romeo Leap to these arms, untalk'd of and unseen.

Lovers can see to do their amorous rites By their own beauties, or, if love be blind, It best agrees with night.

Come, night, come, Romeo, come, thou day in night, For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night Whiter than new snow on a raven's back.

O, here comes my nurse, And she brings news, and every tongue that speaks But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.

Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords That Romeo bid thee fetch? Ay, ay, the cords.

If he be slain, say 'I', or if not, no: Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.

Ah, where's my man? give me some aqua vitae: These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.

'Romeo is banished!' There is no end, no limit, measure, bound, In that word's death, no words can that woe sound.

Where is my father, and my mother, nurse? Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse: Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.

Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent, When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.

Take up those cords: poor ropes, you are beguiled, Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled: He made you for a highway to my bed, But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.

Come, cords, come, nurse, I'll to my wedding-bed, And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead! Hie to your chamber: I'll find Romeo To comfort you: I wot well where he is.

Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night: I'll to him, he is hid at Laurence' cell.

O, find him! give this ring to my true knight, And bid him come to take his last farewell.

Romeo, come forth, come forth, thou fearful man: Affliction is enamour'd of thy parts, And thou art wedded to calamity.

What less than dooms-day is the prince's doom? A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips, Not body's death, but body's banishment.

Ha, banishment! be merciful, say 'death,' For exile hath more terror in his look, Much more than death: do not say 'banishment.

Hence from Verona art thou banished: Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.

There is no world without Verona walls, But purgatory, torture, hell itself.

I'll give thee armour to keep off that word: Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy, To comfort thee, though thou art banished.

Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy! Unless philosophy can make a Juliet, Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom, It helps not, it prevails not: talk no more.

How should they, when that wise men have no eyes? Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.

Knocking within Arise, one knocks, good Romeo, hide thyself.

Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans, Mist-like, infold me from the search of eyes.

Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise, Thou wilt be taken.

By and by! God's will, What simpleness is this! I come, I come! Who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will? my errand, I come from Lady Juliet.

O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar, Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo? There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.

O, he is even in my mistress' case, Just in her case! O woful sympathy! Piteous predicament! Even so lies she, Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering.

Stand up, stand up, stand, and you be a man: For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand, Why should you fall into so deep an O? Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.

As if that name, Shot from the deadly level of a gun, Did murder her, as that name's cursed hand Murder'd her kinsman.

O, tell me, friar, tell me, In what vile part of this anatomy Doth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sack The hateful mansion.

Go before, nurse: commend me to thy lady, And bid her hasten all the house to bed, Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto: Romeo is coming.

O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night To hear good counsel: O, what learning is! My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.

Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir: Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.

But that a joy past joy calls out on me, It were a grief, so brief to part with thee: Farewell.

Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily, That we have had no time to move our daughter: Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly, And so did I:--Well, we were born to die.

'Tis very late, she'll not come down to-night: I promise you, but for your company, I would have been a-bed an hour ago.

I will, and know her mind early to-morrow, To-night she is mew'd up to her heaviness.

Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled In all respects by me, nay, more, I doubt it not.

But what say you to Thursday? My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.

Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed, Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day.

Light to my chamber, ho! Afore me! it is so very very late, That we may call it early by and by.

Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death, I am content, so thou wilt have it so.

It is, it is: hie hence, be gone, away! It is the lark that sings so out of tune, Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.

More light and light, more dark and dark our woes! Your lady mother is coming to your chamber: The day is broke, be wary, look about.

O think'st thou we shall ever meet again? I doubt it not, and all these woes shall serve For sweet discourses in our time to come.

O God, I have an ill-divining soul! Methinks I see thee, now thou art below, As one dead in the bottom of a tomb: Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.

And trust me, love, in my eye so do you: Dry sorrow drinks our blood.

Adieu, adieu! O fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle: If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him.

That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, fortune, For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long, But send him back.

Who is't that calls? is it my lady mother? Is she not down so late, or up so early? What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither? Why, how now, Juliet! Madam, I am not well.

So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend Which you weep for.

Feeling so the loss, Cannot choose but ever weep the friend.

Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death, As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.

God Pardon him! I do, with all my heart, And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.

Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands: Would none but I might venge my cousin's death! We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not: Then weep no more.

I'll send to one in Mantua, Where that same banish'd runagate doth live, Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram, That he shall soon keep Tybalt company: And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.

Indeed, I never shall be satisfied With Romeo, till I behold him--dead-- Is my poor heart for a kinsman vex'd.

Madam, if you could find out but a man To bear a poison, I would temper it, That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof, Soon sleep in quiet.

O, how my heart abhors To hear him named, and cannot come to him.

To wreak the love I bore my cousin Upon his body that slaughter'd him! Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.

Now, by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too, He shall not make me there a joyful bride.

I wonder at this haste, that I must wed Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo.

I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam, I will not marry yet, and, when I do, I swear, It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate, Rather than Paris.

These are news indeed! Here comes your father, tell him so yourself, And see how he will take it at your hands.

When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew, But for the sunset of my brother's son It rains downright.

How now, wife! Have you deliver'd to her our decree? Ay, sir, but she will none, she gives you thanks.

I would the fool were married to her grave! Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.

Out, you green-sickness carrion! out, you baggage! You tallow-face! Fie, fie! what, are you mad? Good father, I beseech you on my knees, Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch! I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday, Or never after look me in the face: Speak not, reply not, do not answer me, My fingers itch.

And why, my lady wisdom? hold your tongue, Good prudence, smatter with your gossips, go.

May not one speak? Peace, you mumbling fool! Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl, For here we need it not.

But, as you will not wed, I'll pardon you: Graze where you will you shall not house with me: Look to't, think on't, I do not use to jest.

Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word: Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.

Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems Upon so soft a subject as myself! What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy? Some comfort, nurse.

Romeo is banish'd, and all the world to nothing, That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you, Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.

Then, since the case so stands as now it doth, I think it best you married with the county.

O, he's a lovely gentleman! Romeo's a dishclout to him: an eagle, madam, Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye As Paris hath.

Beshrew my very heart, I think you are happy in this second match, For it excels your first: or if it did not, Your first is dead, or 'twere as good he were, As living here and you no use of him.

Speakest thou from thy heart? And from my soul too, Or else beshrew them both.

Go in: and tell my lady I am gone, Having displeased my father, to Laurence' cell, To make confession and to be absolved.

I'll to the friar, to know his remedy: If all else fail, myself have power to die.

My father Capulet will have it so, And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.

You say you do not know the lady's mind: Uneven is the course, I like it not.

Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death, And therefore have I little talk'd of love, For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.

Happily met, my lady and my wife! That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.

Come you to make confession to this father? To answer that, I should confess to you.

If I do so, it will be of more price, Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.

The tears have got small victory by that, For it was bad enough before their spite.

Thou wrong'st it, more than tears, with that report.

That is no slander, sir, which is a truth, And what I spake, I spake it to my face.

Are you at leisure, holy father, now, Or shall I come to you at evening mass? My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.

God shield I should disturb devotion! Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye: Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.

Be not so long to speak, I long to die, If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.

Hold, daughter: I do spy a kind of hope, Which craves as desperate an execution.

And this shall free thee from this present shame, If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear, Abate thy valour in the acting it.

Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear! Hold, get you gone, be strong and prosperous In this resolve: I'll send a friar with speed To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.

Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.

Farewell, dear father! So many guests invite as here are writ.

You shall have none ill, sir, for I'll try if they can lick their fingers.

How canst thou try them so? Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers: therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.

What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence? Ay, forsooth.

Well, he may chance to do some good on her: A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.

Send for the county, go tell him of this: I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.

I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell, And gave him what becomed love I might, Not step o'er the bounds of modesty.

Why, I am glad on't, this is well: stand up: This is as't should be.

Let me see the county, Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.

Now, afore God! this reverend holy friar, Our whole city is much bound to him.

Nurse, will you go with me into my closet, To help me sort such needful ornaments As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow? No, not till Thursday, there is time enough.

Go, nurse, go with her: we'll to church to-morrow.

We shall be short in our provision: 'Tis now near night.

Tush, I will stir about, And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife: Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her, I'll not to bed to-night, let me alone, I'll play the housewife for this once.

Well, I will walk myself To County Paris, to prepare him up Against to-morrow: my heart is wondrous light, Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.

Good night: Get thee to bed, and rest, for thou hast need.

What if this mixture do not work at all? Shall I be married then to-morrow morning? No, no: this shall forbid it: lie thou there.

She falls upon her bed, within the curtains Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.

Come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crow'd, The curfew-bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock: Look to the baked meats, good Angelica: Spare not for the cost.

Go, you cot-quean, go, Get you to bed, faith, You'll be sick to-morrow For this night's watching.

No, not a whit: what! I have watch'd ere now All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.

Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time, But I will watch you from such watching now.

A jealous hood, a jealous hood! Now, fellow, What's there? Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what.

Sirrah, fetch drier logs: Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.

I have a head, sir, that will find out logs, And never trouble Peter for the matter.

Mass, and well said, a merry whoreson, ha! Thou shalt be logger-head.

Good faith, 'tis day: The county will be here with music straight, For so he said he would: I hear him near.

God forgive me, Marry, and amen, how sound is she asleep! I must needs wake her.

Madam, madam, madam! Ay, let the county take you in your bed, He'll fright you up, i' faith.

O lamentable day! O woful time! Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail, Ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak.

Come, is the bride ready to go to church? Ready to go, but never to return.

O son! the night before thy wedding-day Hath Death lain with thy wife.

There she lies, Flower as she was, deflowered by him.

Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir, My daughter he hath wedded: I will die, And leave him all, life, living, all is Death's.

Peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure lives not In these confusions.

Heaven and yourself Had part in this fair maid, now heaven hath all, And all the better is it for the maid: Your part in her you could not keep from death, But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.

Honest goodfellows, ah, put up, put up, For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.

Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease, Heart's ease:' O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.

Why 'Heart's ease?' O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My heart is full of woe:' O, play me some merry dump, to comfort me.

You will not, then? I will then give it you soundly.

What will you give us? No money, on my faith, but the gleek, I will give you the minstrel.

Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.

I will carry no crotchets: I'll re you, I'll fa you, do you note me? An you re us and fa us, you note us.

Pray you, put up your dagger, and put out your wit.

Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger.

Pretty! What say you, Hugh Rebeck? I say 'silver sound,' because musicians sound for silver.

Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost? Faith, I know not what to say.

O, I cry you mercy, you are the singer: I will say for you.

It is 'music with her silver sound,' because musicians have no gold for sounding: 'Then music with her silver sound With speedy help doth lend redress.

What a pestilent knave is this same! Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the mourners, and stay dinner.

I dreamt my lady came and found me dead-- Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think!-- And breathed such life with kisses in my lips, That I revived, and was an emperor.

Then she is well, and nothing can be ill: Her body sleeps in Capel's monument, And her immortal part with angels lives.

I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault, And presently took post to tell it you: O, pardon me for bringing these ill news, Since you did leave it for my office, sir.

Is it even so? then I defy you, stars! Thou know'st my lodging: get me ink and paper, And hire post-horses, I will hence to-night.

I do beseech you, sir, have patience: Your looks are pale and wild, and do import Some misadventure.

Tush, thou art deceived: Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.

Hast thou no letters to me from the friar? No, my good lord.

No matter: get thee gone, And hire those horses, I'll be with thee straight.

Noting this penury, to myself I said 'An if a man did need a poison now, Whose sale is present death in Mantua, Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.

O, this same thought did but forerun my need, And this same needy man must sell it me.

What, ho! apothecary! Who calls so loud? Come hither, man.

Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua's law Is death to any he that utters them.

Put this in any liquid thing you will, And drink it off, and, if you had the strength Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.

There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls, Doing more murders in this loathsome world, Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.

Come, cordial and not poison, go with me To Juliet's grave, for there must I use thee.

Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho! This same should be the voice of Friar John.

Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo? Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.

Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo? I could not send it,--here it is again,-- Nor get a messenger to bring it thee, So fearful were they of infection.

Unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood, The letter was not nice but full of charge Of dear import, and the neglecting it May do much danger.

Friar John, go hence, Get me an iron crow, and bring it straight Unto my cell.

Do as I bid thee, go. Here in the churchyard, yet I will adventure.

The Page whistles The boy gives warning something doth approach.

What cursed foot wanders this way to-night, To cross my obsequies and true love's rite? What with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile.

Hold, take this letter, early in the morning See thou deliver it to my lord and father.

Give me the light: upon thy life, I charge thee, Whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof, And do not interrupt me in my course.

Take thou that: Live, and be prosperous: and farewell, good fellow.

Comes forward Stop thy unhallow'd toil, vile Montague! Can vengeance be pursued further than death? Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee: Obey, and go with me, for thou must die.

Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man, Fly hence, and leave me: think upon these gone, Let them affright thee.

I do defy thy conjurations, And apprehend thee for a felon here.

Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy! They fight O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.

O, I am slain! If thou be merciful, Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.

Thus with a kiss I die. Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there? Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.

Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend, What torch is yond, that vainly lends his light To grubs and eyeless skulls? as I discern, It burneth in the Capel's monument.

It doth so, holy sir, and there's my master, One that you love.

Who is it? How long hath he been there? Full half an hour.

I dare not, sir My master knows not but I am gone hence, And fearfully did menace me with death, If I did stay to look on his intents.

Fear comes upon me: O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.

As I did sleep under this yew-tree here, I dreamt my master and another fought, And that my master slew him.

JULIET wakes O comfortable friar! where is my lord? I do remember well where I should be, And there I am.

Where is my Romeo? Noise within I hear some noise.

Lady, come from that nest Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep: A greater power than we can contradict Hath thwarted our intents.

Come, come away. Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead, And Paris too.

Come, I'll dispose of thee Among a sisterhood of holy nuns: Stay not to question, for the watch is coming, Come, go, good Juliet, Noise again I dare no longer stay.

O happy dagger! Snatching ROMEO's dagger This is thy sheath, Stabs herself there rust, and let me die.

Falls on ROMEO's body, and dies This is the place, there, where the torch doth burn.

The ground is bloody, search about the churchyard: Go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach.

Pitiful sight! here lies the county slain, And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead, Who here hath lain these two days buried.

Re-enter some of the Watch, with BALTHASAR Here's Romeo's man, we found him in the churchyard.

Re-enter others of the Watch, with FRIAR LAURENCE Here is a friar, that trembles, sighs and weeps: We took this mattock and this spade from him, As he was coming from this churchyard side.

What fear is this which startles in our ears? Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain, And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before, Warm and new kill'd.

Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.

Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man, With instruments upon them, fit to open These dead men's tombs.

Come, Montague, for thou art early up, To see thy son and heir more early down.

Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night, Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath: What further woe conspires against mine age? Look, and thou shalt see.

I will be brief, for my short date of breath Is not so long as is a tedious tale.

But he which bore my letter, Friar John, Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight Return'd my letter back.

All this I know, and to the marriage Her nurse is privy: and, if aught in this Miscarried by my fault, let my old life Be sacrificed, some hour before his time, Unto the rigour of severest law.

Where's Romeo's man? what can he say in this? I brought my master news of Juliet's death, And then in post he came from Mantua To this same place, to this same monument.

This letter he early bid me give his father, And threatened me with death, going in the vault, I departed not and left him there.

Where be these enemies? Capulet! Montague! See, what a scourge is laid upon your hate, That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love.

And I for winking at your discords too Have lost a brace of kinsmen: all are punish'd.

O brother Montague, give me thy hand: This is my daughter's jointure, for no more Can I demand.

But I can give thee more: For I will raise her statue in pure gold, That while Verona by that name is known, There shall no figure at such rate be set As that of true and faithful Juliet.

A pair of stocks, you rogue! Ye are a baggage: the Slys are no rogues, look in the chronicles, we came in with Richard Conqueror.

Therefore paucas pallabris, let the world slide: sessa! You will not pay for the glasses you have burst? No, not a denier.

Go by, Jeronimy: go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.

I know my remedy, I must go fetch the Third, or fourth, or fifth borough, I'll answer him by law: I'll not budge an inch, boy: let him come, and kindly.

Enter a Lord from hunting, with his train Huntsman, I charge thee, tender well my hounds: Brach Merriman, the poor cur is emboss'd, And couple Clowder with the deep--mouth'd brach.

Saw'st thou not, boy, how Silver made it good At the hedge-corner, in the coldest fault? I would not lose the dog for twenty pound.

Why, Belman is as good as he, my lord, He cried upon it at the merest loss And twice to-day pick'd out the dullest scent: Trust me, I take him for the better dog.

Thou art a fool: if Echo were as fleet, I would esteem him worth a dozen such.

But sup them well and look unto them all: To-morrow I intend to hunt again.

What's here? one dead, or drunk? See, doth he breathe? He breathes, my lord.

Were he not warm'd with ale, This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.

O monstrous beast! how like a swine he lies! Grim death, how foul and loathsome is thine image! Sirs, I will practise on this drunken man.

This do and do it kindly, gentle sirs: It will be pastime passing excellent, If it be husbanded with modesty.

My lord, I warrant you we will play our part, As he shall think by our true diligence He is no less than what we say he is.

Take him up gently and to bed with him, And each one to his office when he wakes.

A trumpet sounds Sirrah, go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds: Belike, some noble gentleman that means, Travelling some journey, to repose him here.

Re-enter Servingman How now! who is it? An't please your honour, players That offer service to your lordship.

Do you intend to stay with me tonight? So please your lordship to accept our duty.

Well, you are come to me in a happy time, The rather for I have some sport in hand Wherein your cunning can assist me much.

Fear not, my lord: we can contain ourselves, Were he the veriest antic in the world.

Go, sirrah, take them to the buttery, And give them friendly welcome every one: Let them want nothing that my house affords.

Sirrah, go you to Barthol'mew my page, And see him dress'd in all suits like a lady: That done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber, And call him 'madam,' do him obeisance.

See this dispatch'd with all the haste thou canst: Anon I'll give thee more instructions.

I'll in to counsel them, haply my presence May well abate the over-merry spleen Which otherwise would grow into extremes.

O noble lord, bethink thee of thy birth, Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment And banish hence these abject lowly dreams.

Look how thy servants do attend on thee, Each in his office ready at thy beck.

Say thou wilt walk, we will bestrew the ground: Or wilt thou ride? thy horses shall be trapp'd, Their harness studded all with gold and pearl.

Dost thou love hawking? thou hast hawks will soar Above the morning lark or wilt thou hunt? Thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them And fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.

Say thou wilt course, thy greyhounds are as swift As breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.

We'll show thee Io as she was a maid, And how she was beguiled and surprised, As lively painted as the deed was done.

Or Daphne roaming through a thorny wood, Scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds, And at that sight shall sad Apollo weep, So workmanly the blood and tears are drawn.

Thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord: Thou hast a lady far more beautiful Than any woman in this waning age.

And till the tears that she hath shed for thee Like envious floods o'er-run her lovely face, She was the fairest creature in the world, And yet she is inferior to none.

Well, bring our lady hither to our sight, And once again, a pot o' the smallest ale.

Now Lord be thanked for my good amends! I thank thee: thou shalt not lose by it.

How fares my noble lord? Marry, I fare well for here is cheer enough.

Where is my wife? Here, noble lord: what is thy will with her? Are you my wife and will not call me husband? My men should call me 'lord:' I am your goodman.

My husband and my lord, my lord and husband, I am your wife in all obedience.

What must I call her? Al'ce madam, or Joan madam? 'Madam,' and nothing else: so lords call ladies.

Madam wife, they say that I have dream'd And slept above some fifteen year or more.

Ay, and the time seems thirty unto me, Being all this time abandon'd from your bed.

Servants, leave me and her alone. Madam, undress you and come now to bed.

But I would be loath to fall into my dreams again: I will therefore tarry in despite of the flesh and the blood.

Is not a comondy a Christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick? No, my good lord, it is more pleasing stuff.

Come, madam wife, sit by my side and let the world slip: we shall ne'er be younger.

Pisa renown'd for grave citizens Gave me my being and my father first, A merchant of great traffic through the world, Vincetino come of Bentivolii.

Tell me thy mind, for I have Pisa left And am to Padua come, as he that leaves A shallow plash to plunge him in the deep And with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.

Mi perdonato, gentle master mine, I am in all affected as yourself, Glad that you thus continue your resolve To suck the sweets of sweet philosophy.

If, Biondello, thou wert come ashore, We could at once put us in readiness, And take a lodging fit to entertain Such friends as time in Padua shall beget.

But stay a while: what company is this? Master, some show to welcome us to town.

From all such devils, good Lord deliver us! And me too, good Lord! Hush, master! here's some good pastime toward: That wench is stark mad or wonderful froward.

But in the other's silence do I see Maid's mild behavior and sobriety.

Peace, Tranio! Well said, master, mum! and gaze your fill.

Gentlemen, that I may soon make good What I have said, Bianca, get you in: And let it not displease thee, good Bianca, For I will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.

A pretty peat! it is best Put finger in the eye, an she knew why.

Sir, to your pleasure humbly I subscribe: My books and instruments shall be my company, On them to took and practise by myself.

Signior Baptista, will you be so strange? Sorry am I that our good will effects Bianca's grief.

If you, Hortensio, Or Signior Gremio, you, know any such, Prefer them hither, for to cunning men I will be very kind, and liberal To mine own children in good bringing up: And so farewell.

Katharina, you may stay, For I have more to commune with Bianca.

Their love is not so great, Hortensio, but we may blow our nails together, and fast it fairly out: our cakes dough on both sides.

Farewell: yet for the love I bear my sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will wish him to her father.

What's that, I pray? Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.

I cannot tell, but I had as lief take her dowry with this condition, to be whipped at the high cross every morning.

Faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten apples.

Sweet Bianca! Happy man be his dole! He that runs fastest gets the ring.

How say you, Signior Gremio? I am agreed, and would I had given him the best horse in Padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed her and bed her and rid the house of her! Come on.

Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst, Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.

Master, it is no time to chide you now, Affection is not rated from the heart: If love have touch'd you, nought remains but so, 'Redime te captum quam queas minimo.

Gramercies, lad, go forward, this contents: The rest will comfort, for thy counsel's sound.

Master, you look'd so longly on the maid, Perhaps you mark'd not what's the pith of all.

O yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face, Such as the daughter of Agenor had, That made great Jove to humble him to her hand.

I pray, awake, sir: if you love the maid, Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her.

Ah, Tranio, what a cruel father's he! But art thou not advised, he took some care To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her? Ay, marry, am I, sir, and now 'tis plotted.

Master, for my hand, Both our inventions meet and jump in one.

You will be schoolmaster And undertake the teaching of the maid: That's your device.

'Tis hatch'd and shall be so: Tranio, at once Uncase thee, take my colour'd hat and cloak: When Biondello comes, he waits on thee, But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.

Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves: And let me be a slave, to achieve that maid Whose sudden sight hath thrall'd my wounded eye.

And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth: Tranio is changed into Lucentio.

The better for him: would I were so too! So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after, That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daughter.

But, sirrah, not for my sake, but your master's, I advise You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies: When I am alone, why, then I am Tranio, But in all places else your master Lucentio.

Tranio, let's go: one thing more rests, that thyself execute, to make one among these wooers: if thou ask me why, sufficeth, my reasons are both good and weighty.

The presenters above speak My lord, you nod, you do not mind the play.

A good matter, surely: comes there any more of it? My lord, 'tis but begun.

Knock, sir! whom should I knock? is there man has rebused your worship? Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.

Knock you here, sir! why, sir, what am I, sir, that I should knock you here, sir? Villain, I say, knock me at this gate And rap me well, or I'll knock your knave's pate.

I should knock you first, And then I know after who comes by the worst.

Will it not be? Faith, sirrah, an you'll not knock, I'll ring it, I'll try how you can sol, fa, and sing it.

He wrings him by the ears Help, masters, help! my master is mad.

'Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor mio Petruchio.

Rise, Grumio, rise: we will compound this quarrel.

Nay, 'tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in Latin.

A senseless villain! Good Hortensio, I bade the rascal knock upon your gate And could not get him for my heart to do it.

Petruchio, patience, I am Grumio's pledge: Why, this's a heavy chance 'twixt him and you, Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.

Petruchio, since we are stepp'd thus far in, I will continue that I broach'd in jest.

Hortensio, peace! thou know'st not gold's effect: Tell me her father's name and 'tis enough, For I will board her, though she chide as loud As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.

Her father is Baptista Minola, An affable and courteous gentleman: Her name is Katharina Minola, Renown'd in Padua for her scolding tongue.

I know her father, though I know not her, And he knew my deceased father well.

I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her, And therefore let me be thus bold with you To give you over at this first encounter, Unless you will accompany me thither.

I pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts.

I'll tell you what sir, an she stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face and so disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat.

Katharina the curst! A title for a maid of all titles the worst.

Here's no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks, how the young folks lay their heads together! Master, master, look about you: who goes there, ha? Peace, Grumio! it is the rival of my love.

A proper stripling and an amorous! O, very well, I have perused the note.

Take your paper too, And let me have them very well perfumed For she is sweeter than perfume itself To whom they go to.

O this learning, what a thing it is! O this woodcock, what an ass it is! Peace, sirrah! Grumio, mum! God save you, Signior Gremio.

'Tis well, and I have met a gentleman Hath promised me to help me to another, A fine musician to instruct our mistress, So shall I no whit be behind in duty To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.

Gremio, 'tis now no time to vent our love: Listen to me, and if you speak me fair, I'll tell you news indifferent good for either.

Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met, Upon agreement from us to his liking, Will undertake to woo curst Katharina, Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.

Hortensio, have you told him all her faults? I know she is an irksome brawling scold: If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.

No, say'st me so, friend? What countryman? Born in Verona, old Antonio's son: My father dead, my fortune lives for me, And I do hope good days and long to see.

O sir, such a life, with such a wife, were strange! But if you have a stomach, to't i' God's name: You shall have me assisting you in all.

But will you woo this wild-cat? Will I live? Will he woo her? ay, or I'll hang her.

Hortensio, hark: This gentleman is happily arrived, My mind presumes, for his own good and ours.

I promised we would be contributors And bear his charging of wooing, whatsoe'er.

If I may be bold, Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way To the house of Signior Baptista Minola? He that has the two fair daughters: is't he you mean? Even he, Biondello.

Hark you, sir, you mean not her to-- Perhaps, him and her, sir: what have you to do? Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.

Sir, a word ere you go, Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no? And if I be, sir, is it any offence? No, if without more words you will get you hence.

Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free For me as for you? But so is not she.

For what reason, I beseech you? For this reason, if you'll know, That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio.

Softly, my masters! if you be gentlemen, Do me this right, hear me with patience.

Baptista is a noble gentleman, To whom my father is not all unknown, And were his daughter fairer than she is, She may more suitors have and me for one.

Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers, Then well one more may fair Bianca have: And so she shall, Lucentio shall make one, Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.

Yea, leave that labour to great Hercules, And let it be more than Alcides' twelve.

Sir, you say well and well you do conceive, And since you do profess to be a suitor, You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman, To whom we all rest generally beholding.

The motion's good indeed and be it so, Petruchio, I shall be your ben venuto.

Of all thy suitors, here I charge thee, tell Whom thou lovest best: see thou dissemble not.

Believe me, sister, of all the men alive I never yet beheld that special face Which I could fancy more than any other.

Is't not Hortensio? If you affect him, sister, here I swear I'll plead for you myself, but you shall have O then, belike, you fancy riches more: You will have Gremio to keep you fair.

Is it for him you do envy me so? Nay then you jest, and now I well perceive You have but jested with me all this while: I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.

Strikes her Why, how now, dame! whence grows this insolence? Bianca, stand aside.

Poor girl! she weeps. Go ply thy needle, meddle not with her.

For shame, thou helding of a devilish spirit, Why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee? When did she cross thee with a bitter word? Her silence flouts me, and I'll be revenged.

Flies after BIANCA What, in my sight? Bianca, get thee in.

What, will you not suffer me? Nay, now I see She is your treasure, she must have a husband, I must dance bare-foot on her wedding day And for your love to her lead apes in hell.

Talk not to me: I will go sit and weep Till I can find occasion of revenge.

Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I? But who comes here? Good morrow, neighbour Baptista.

God save you, gentlemen! And you, good sir! Pray, have you not a daughter Call'd Katharina, fair and virtuous? I have a daughter, sir, called Katharina.

But for my daughter Katharina, this I know, She is not for your turn, the more my grief.

I see you do not mean to part with her, Or else you like not of my company.

Whence are you, sir? what may I call your name? Petruchio is my name, Antonio's son, A man well known throughout all Italy.

Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray, Let us, that are poor petitioners, speak too: Baccare! you are marvellous forward.

O, pardon me, Signior Gremio, I would fain be doing.

I doubt it not, sir, but you will curse your wooing.

Neighbour, this is a gift very grateful, I am sure of it.

Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me, In the preferment of the eldest sister.

Lucentio is your name, of whence, I pray? Of Pisa, sir, son to Vincentio.

A mighty man of Pisa, by report I know him well: you are very welcome, sir, Take you the lute, and you the set of books, You shall go see your pupils presently.

Holla, within! Sirrah, lead these gentlemen To my daughters, and tell them both, These are their tutors: bid them use them well.

We will go walk a little in the orchard, And then to dinner.

You are passing welcome, And so I pray you all to think yourselves.

Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste, And every day I cannot come to woo.

Ay, when the special thing is well obtain'd, That is, her love, for that is all in all.

Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed! But be thou arm'd for some unhappy words.

Ay, to the proof, as mountains are for winds, That shake not, though they blow perpetually.

Re-enter HORTENSIO, with his head broke How now, my friend! why dost thou look so pale? For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.

What, will my daughter prove a good musician? I think she'll sooner prove a soldier Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.

Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute? Why, no, for she hath broke the lute to me.

Signior Petruchio, will you go with us, Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you? I pray you do.

I will attend her here, And woo her with some spirit when she comes.

Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing: They call me Katharina that do talk of me.

Moved! in good time: let him that moved you hither Remove you hence: I knew you at the first You were a moveable.

Alas! good Kate, I will not burden thee, For, knowing thee to be but young and light-- Too light for such a swain as you to catch, And yet as heavy as my weight should be.

Should be! should--buzz! Well ta'en, and like a buzzard.

O slow-wing'd turtle! shall a buzzard take thee? Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.

Come, come, you wasp, i' faith, you are too angry.

Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies, Who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting? In his tail.

Whose tongue? Yours, if you talk of tails: and so farewell.

What, with my tongue in your tail? nay, come again, Good Kate, I am a gentleman.

She strikes him I swear I'll cuff you, if you strike again.

So may you lose your arms: If you strike me, you are no gentleman, And if no gentleman, why then no arms.

A herald, Kate? O, put me in thy books! What is your crest? a coxcomb? A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.

What, you mean my face? Well aim'd of such a young one.

Why does the world report that Kate doth limp? O slanderous world! Kate like the hazel-twig Is straight and slender and as brown in hue As hazel nuts and sweeter than the kernels.

Here comes your father: never make denial, I must and will have Katharina to my wife.

Re-enter BAPTISTA, GREMIO, and TRANIO Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter? How but well, sir? how but well? It were impossible I should speed amiss.

Hark, Petruchio, she says she'll see thee hang'd first.

O, you are novices! 'tis a world to see, How tame, when men and women are alone, A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.

Give me thy hand, Kate: I will unto Venice, To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding-day.

Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests, I will be sure my Katharina shall be fine.

I know not what to say: but give me your hands, God send you joy, Petruchio! 'tis a match.

Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu, I will to Venice, Sunday comes apace: We will have rings and things and fine array, And kiss me, Kate, we will be married o'Sunday.

Was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly? Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchant's part, And venture madly on a desperate mart.

'Twas a commodity lay fretting by you: 'Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.

But now, Baptists, to your younger daughter: Now is the day we long have looked for: I am your neighbour, and was suitor first.

And I am one that love Bianca more Than words can witness, or your thoughts can guess.

Content you, gentlemen: I will compound this strife: 'Tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both That can assure my daughter greatest dower Shall have my Bianca's love.

Myself am struck in years, I must confess, And if I die to-morrow, this is hers, If whilst I live she will be only mine.

What, have I pinch'd you, Signior Gremio? Two thousand ducats by the year of land! My land amounts not to so much in all: That she shall have, besides an argosy That now is lying in Marseilles' road.

Nay, I have offer'd all, I have no more, And she can have no more than all I have: If you like me, she shall have me and mine.

Why, then the maid is mine from all the world, By your firm promise: Gremio is out-vied.

Now I fear thee not: Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool To give thee all, and in his waning age Set foot under thy table: tut, a toy! An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.

A vengeance on your crafty wither'd hide! Yet I have faced it with a card of ten.

And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down: Take you your instrument, play you the whiles, His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.

You'll leave his lecture when I am in tune? That will be never: tune your instrument.

Where left we last? Here, madam: 'Hic ibat Simois, hic est Sigeia tellus, Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.

O fie! the treble jars. Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.

How fiery and forward our pedant is! Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love: Pedascule, I'll watch you better yet.

Mistrust it not: for, sure, AEacides Was Ajax, call'd so from his grandfather.

I must believe my master, else, I promise you, I should be arguing still upon that doubt: But let it rest.

Now, Licio, to you: Good masters, take it not unkindly, pray, That I have been thus pleasant with you both.

You may go walk, and give me leave a while: My lessons make no music in three parts.

Are you so formal, sir? well, I must wait, And watch withal, for, but I be deceived, Our fine musician groweth amorous.

'A re,' to Plead Hortensio's passion, 'B mi,' Bianca, take him for thy lord, 'C fa ut,' that loves with all affection: 'D sol re,' one clef, two notes have I: 'E la mi,' show pity, or I die.

Call you this gamut? tut, I like it not: Old fashions please me best, I am not so nice, To change true rules for old inventions.

Mistress, your father prays you leave your books And help to dress your sister's chamber up: You know to-morrow is the wedding-day.

That Katharina and Petruchio should be married, And yet we hear not of our son-in-law.

Now must the world point at poor Katharina, And say, 'Lo, there is mad Petruchio's wife, If it would please him come and marry her!' Patience, good Katharina, and Baptista too.

Upon my life, Petruchio means but well, Whatever fortune stays him from his word: Though he be blunt, I know him passing wise, Though he be merry, yet withal he's honest.

Would Katharina had never seen him though! Go, girl, I cannot blame thee now to weep, For such an injury would vex a very saint, Much more a shrew of thy impatient humour.

Master, master! news, old news, and such news as you never heard of! Is it new and old too? how may that be? Why, is it not news, to hear of Petruchio's coming? Is he come? Why, no, sir.

When will he be here? When he stands where I am and sees you there.

'Tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion, Yet oftentimes he goes but mean-apparell'd.

Didst thou not say he comes? Who? that Petruchio came? Ay, that Petruchio came.

No, sir, I say his horse comes, with him on his back.

Nay, by Saint Jamy, I hold you a penny, A horse and a man Is more than one, And yet not many.

Come, where be these gallants? who's at home? You are welcome, sir.

But where is Kate? I stay too long from her: The morning wears, 'tis time we were at church.

See not your bride in these unreverent robes: Go to my chamber, Put on clothes of mine.

But to her love concerneth us to add Her father's liking: which to bring to pass, As I before unparted to your worship, I am to get a man,--whate'er he be, It skills not much.

we'll fit him to our turn,-- And he shall be Vincentio of Pisa, And make assurance here in Padua Of greater sums than I have promised.

So shall you quietly enjoy your hope, And marry sweet Bianca with consent.

Re-enter GREMIO Signior Gremio, came you from the church? As willingly as e'er I came from school.

And is the bride and bridegroom coming home? A bridegroom say you? 'tis a groom indeed, A grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.

What said the wench when he rose again? Trembled and shook, for why, he stamp'd and swore, As if the vicar meant to cozen him.

Such a mad marriage never was before: Hark, hark! I hear the minstrels play.

Is't possible you will away to-night? I must away to-day, before night come: Make it no wonder, if you knew my business, You would entreat me rather go than stay.

Are you content to stay? I am content you shall entreat me stay, But yet not stay, entreat me how you can.

Ay, sir, they be ready: the oats have eaten the horses.

Nay, then, Do what thou canst, I will not go to-day, No, nor to-morrow, not till I please myself.

I will be angry: what hast thou to do? Father, be quiet, he shall stay my leisure.

Gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner: I see a woman may be made a fool, If she had not a spirit to resist.

Obey the bride, you that attend on her, Go to the feast, revel and domineer, Carouse full measure to her maidenhead, Be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves: But for my bonny Kate, she must with me.

Grumio, Draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves, Rescue thy mistress, if thou be a man.

Fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch thee, Kate: I'll buckler thee against a million.

Went they not quickly, I should die with laughing.

Mistress, what's your opinion of your sister? That, being mad herself, she's madly mated.

Neighbours and friends, though bride and bridegroom wants For to supply the places at the table, You know there wants no junkets at the feast.

Lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place: And let Bianca take her sister's room.

Shall sweet Bianca practise how to bride it? She shall, Lucentio.

Holla, ho! Curtis. Who is that calls so coldly? A piece of ice: if thou doubt it, thou mayst slide from my shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my neck.

A fire good Curtis. Is my master and his wife coming, Grumio? O, ay, Curtis, ay: and therefore fire, fire, cast on no water.

Am I but three inches? why, thy horn is a foot, and so long am I at the least.

There's fire ready, and therefore, good Grumio, the news.

Why, 'Jack, boy! ho! boy!' and as much news as will thaw.

Come, you are so full of cony-catching! Why, therefore fire, for I have caught extreme cold.

First, know, my horse is tired, my master and mistress fallen out.

Out of their saddles into the dirt, and thereby hangs a tale.

Strikes him This is to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.

And therefore 'tis called a sensible tale: and this cuff was but to knock at your ear, and beseech listening.

Now I begin: Imprimis, we came down a foul hill, my master riding behind my mistress,-- Both of one horse? What's that to thee? Why, a horse.

Ay, and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find when he comes home.

Do you hear, ho? you must meet my master to countenance my mistress.

Who knows not that? Thou, it seems, that calls for company to countenance her.

Welcome home, Grumio! How now, Grumio! What, Grumio! Fellow Grumio! How now, old lad? Welcome, you,--how now, you,-- what, you,--fellow, you,--and thus much for greeting.

Now, my spruce companions, is all ready, and all things neat? All things is ready.

How near is our master? E'en at hand, alighted by this, and therefore be not--Cock's passion, silence! I hear my master.

Where be these knaves? What, no man at door To hold my stirrup nor to take my horse! Where is Nathaniel, Gregory, Philip? ALL SERVING-MEN	Here, here, sir, here, sir.

Where is the life that late I led-- Where are those--Sit down, Kate, and welcome.

- Sound, sound, sound, sound! Re-enter Servants with supper Why, when, I say? Nay, good sweet Kate, be merry.

Some water, here, what, ho! Where's my spaniel Troilus? Sirrah, get you hence, And bid my cousin Ferdinand come hither: One, Kate, that you must kiss, and be acquainted with.

Where are my slippers? Shall I have some water? Come, Kate, and wash, and welcome heartily.

You whoreson villain! will you let it fall? Strikes him Patience, I pray you, 'twas a fault unwilling.

A whoreson beetle-headed, flap-ear'd knave! Come, Kate, sit down, I know you have a stomach.

Will you give thanks, sweet Kate, or else shall I? What's this? mutton? Who brought it? 'Tis burnt, and so is all the meat.

about the stage You heedless joltheads and unmanner'd slaves! What, do you grumble? I'll be with you straight.

I pray you, husband, be not so disquiet: The meat was well, if you were so contented.

Be patient, to-morrow 't shall be mended, And, for this night, we'll fast for company: Come, I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.

Re-enter Servants severally Peter, didst ever see the like? He kills her in her own humour.

Re-enter PETRUCHIO Thus have I politicly begun my reign, And 'tis my hope to end successfully.

My falcon now is sharp and passing empty, And till she stoop she must not be full-gorged, For then she never looks upon her lure.

Another way I have to man my haggard, To make her come and know her keeper's call, That is, to watch her, as we watch these kites That bate and beat and will not be obedient.

This is a way to kill a wife with kindness, And thus I'll curb her mad and headstrong humour.

He that knows better how to tame a shrew, Now let him speak: 'tis charity to show.

Is't possible, friend Licio, that Mistress Bianca Doth fancy any other but Lucentio? I tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.

Sir, to satisfy you in what I have said, Stand by and mark the manner of his teaching.

Now, mistress, profit you in what you read? What, master, read you? first resolve me that.

O despiteful love! unconstant womankind! I tell thee, Licio, this is wonderful.

Kindness in women, not their beauteous looks, Shall win my love: and so I take my leave, In resolution as I swore before.

Mistress Bianca, bless you with such grace As 'longeth to a lover's blessed case! Nay, I have ta'en you napping, gentle love, And have forsworn you with Hortensio.

Tranio, you jest: but have you both forsworn me? Mistress, we have.

I' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now, That shall be wood and wedded in a day.

The taming-school! what, is there such a place? Ay, mistress, and Petruchio is the master, That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long, To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.

O master, master, I have watch'd so long That I am dog-weary: but at last I spied An ancient angel coming down the hill, Will serve the turn.

What is he, Biondello? Master, a mercatante, or a pedant, I know not what, but format in apparel, In gait and countenance surely like a father.

Travel you far on, or are you at the farthest? Sir, at the farthest for a week or two: But then up farther, and as for as Rome, And so to Tripoli, if God lend me life.

Of Mantua, sir? marry, God forbid! And come to Padua, careless of your life? My life, sir! how, I pray? for that goes hard.

'Tis death for any one in Mantua To come to Padua.

Alas! sir, it is worse for me than so, For I have bills for money by exchange From Florence and must here deliver them.

Well, sir, to do you courtesy, This will I do, and this I will advise you: First, tell me, have you ever been at Pisa? Ay, sir, in Pisa have I often been, Pisa renowned for grave citizens.

Among them know you one Vincentio? I know him not, but I have heard of him, A merchant of incomparable wealth.

He is my father, sir, and, sooth to say, In countenance somewhat doth resemble you.

To save your life in this extremity, This favour will I do you for his sake, And think it not the worst of an your fortunes That you are like to Sir Vincentio.

O sir, I do, and will repute you ever The patron of my life and liberty.

I prithee go and get me some repast, I care not what, so it be wholesome food.

What say you to a neat's foot? 'Tis passing good: I prithee let me have it.

How say you to a fat tripe finely broil'd? I like it well: good Grumio, fetch it me.

What say you to a piece of beef and mustard? A dish that I do love to feed upon.

Nay then, I will not: you shall have the mustard, Or else you get no beef of Grumio.

Go, get thee gone, thou false deluding slave, Beats him That feed'st me with the very name of meat: Sorrow on thee and all the pack of you, That triumph thus upon my misery! Go, get thee gone, I say.

How fares my Kate? What, sweeting, all amort? Mistress, what cheer? Faith, as cold as can be.

Here love, thou see'st how diligent I am To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee: I am sure, sweet Kate, this kindness merits thanks.

What, not a word? Nay, then thou lovest it not, And all my pains is sorted to no proof.

The poorest service is repaid with thanks, And so shall mine, before you touch the meat.

What, hast thou dined? The tailor stays thy leisure, To deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.

Come, tailor, let us see these ornaments, Lay forth the gown.

What news with you, sir? Here is the cap your worship did bespeak.

I'll have no bigger: this doth fit the time, And gentlewomen wear such caps as these When you are gentle, you shall have one too, And not till then.

Why, sir, I trust I may have leave to speak, And speak I will, I am no child, no babe: Your betters have endured me say my mind, And if you cannot, best you stop your ears.

My tongue will tell the anger of my heart, Or else my heart concealing it will break, And rather than it shall, I will be free Even to the uttermost, as I please, in words.

Why, thou say'st true, it is a paltry cap, A custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie: I love thee well, in that thou likest it not.

Love me or love me not, I like the cap, And it I will have, or I will have none.

Marry, and did, but if you be remember'd, I did not bid you mar it to the time.

Go, hop me over every kennel home, For you shall hop without my custom, sir: I'll none of it: hence! make your best of it.

I never saw a better-fashion'd gown, More quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable: Belike you mean to make a puppet of me.

She says your worship means to make a puppet of her.

Your worship is deceived, the gown is made Just as my master had direction: Grumio gave order how it should be done.

But how did you desire it should be made? Marry, sir, with needle and thread.

But did you not request to have it cut? Thou hast faced many things.

Face not me: thou hast braved many men, brave not me, I will neither be faced nor braved.

I say unto thee, I bid thy master cut out the gown, but I did not bid him cut it to pieces: ergo, thou liest.

Why, here is the note of the fashion to testify Read it.

Master, if ever I said loose-bodied gown, sew me in the skirts of it, and beat me to death with a bottom of brown thread: I said a gown.

I commanded the sleeves should be cut out and sewed up again, and that I'll prove upon thee, though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.

This is true that I say: an I had thee in place where, thou shouldst know it.

I am for thee straight: take thou the bill, give me thy mete-yard, and spare not me.

Tailor, I'll pay thee for thy gown tomorrow: Take no unkindness of his hasty words: Away! I say, commend me to thy master.

lay it on me, And therefore frolic: we will hence forthwith, To feast and sport us at thy father's house.

I dare assure you, sir, 'tis almost two, And 'twill be supper-time ere you come there.

It shall be seven ere I go to horse: Look, what I speak, or do, or think to do, You are still crossing it.

Sirs, let't alone: I will not go to-day, and ere I do, It shall be what o'clock I say it is.

Sir, this is the house: please it you that I call? Ay, what else? and but I be deceived Signior Baptista may remember me, Near twenty years ago, in Genoa, Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus.

'Tis well, and hold your own, in any case, With such austerity as 'longeth to a father.

But, sir, here comes your boy, 'Twere good he were school'd.

Sirrah Biondello, Now do your duty throughly, I advise you: Imagine 'twere the right Vincentio.

But hast thou done thy errand to Baptista? I told him that your father was at Venice, And that you look'd for him this day in Padua.

To the Pedant Sir, this is the gentleman I told you of: I pray you stand good father to me now, Give me Bianca for my patrimony.

Sir, pardon me in what I have to say: Your plainness and your shortness please me well.

Then at my lodging, an it like you: There doth my father lie, and there, this night, We'll pass the business privately and well.

Send for your daughter by your servant here: My boy shall fetch the scrivener presently.

The worst is this, that, at so slender warning, You are like to have a thin and slender pittance.

Biondello, hie you home, And bid Bianca make her ready straight, And, if you will, tell what hath happened, Lucentio's father is arrived in Padua, And how she's like to be Lucentio's wife.

I pray the gods she may with all my heart! Dally not with the gods, but get thee gone.

Signior Baptista, shall I lead the way? Welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer: Come, sir, we will better it in Pisa.

Baptista is safe, talking with the deceiving father of a deceitful son.

And what of him? His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.

And then? The old priest of Saint Luke's church is at your command at all hours.

Hearest thou, Biondello? I cannot tarry: I knew a wench married in an afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit, and so may you, sir: and so, adieu, sir.

My master hath appointed me to go to Saint Luke's, to bid the priest be ready to come against you come with your appendix.

I may, and will, if she be so contented: She will be pleased, then wherefore should I doubt? Hap what hap may, I'll roundly go about her: It shall go hard if Cambio go without her.

Come on, i' God's name, once more toward our father's.

Good Lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon! The moon! the sun: it is not moonlight now.

Now, by my mother's son, and that's myself, It shall be moon, or star, or what I list, Or ere I journey to your father's house.

Evermore cross'd and cross'd, nothing but cross'd! Say as he says, or we shall never go.

Forward, I pray, since we have come so far, And be it moon, or sun, or what you please: An if you please to call it a rush-candle, Henceforth I vow it shall be so for me.

Then, God be bless'd, it is the blessed sun: But sun it is not, when you say it is not, And the moon changes even as your mind.

What you will have it named, even that it is, And so it shall be so for Katharina.

Well, forward, forward! thus the bowl should run, And not unluckily against the bias.

Do, good old grandsire, and withal make known Which way thou travellest: if along with us, We shall be joyful of thy company.

And now by law, as well as reverend age, I may entitle thee my loving father: The sister to my wife, this gentlewoman, Thy son by this hath married.

Wonder not, Nor be grieved: she is of good esteem, Her dowery wealthy, and of worthy birth, Beside, so qualified as may beseem The spouse of any noble gentleman.

Let me embrace with old Vincentio, And wander we to see thy honest son, Who will of thy arrival be full joyous.

But is it true? or else is it your pleasure, Like pleasant travellers, to break a jest Upon the company you overtake? I do assure thee, father, so it is.

Come, go along, and see the truth hereof, For our first merriment hath made thee jealous.

Have to my widow! and if she be froward, Then hast thou taught Hortensio to be untoward.

Enter behind BIONDELLO, LUCENTIO, and BIANCA Softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.

I fly, Biondello: but they may chance to need thee at home, therefore leave us.

Nay, faith, I'll see the church o' your back, and then come back to my master's as soon as I can.

Sir, here's the door, this is Lucentio's house: My father's bears more toward the market-place, Thither must I, and here I leave you, sir.

You shall not choose but drink before you go: I think I shall command your welcome here, And, by all likelihood, some cheer is toward.

Pedant looks out of the window What's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate? Is Signior Lucentio within, sir? He's within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.

What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two, to make merry withal? Keep your hundred pounds to yourself: he shall need none, so long as I live.

Nay, I told you your son was well beloved in Padua.

Do you hear, sir? To leave frivolous circumstances, I pray you, tell Signior Lucentio that his father is come from Pisa, and is here at the door to speak with him.

Thou liest: his father is come from Padua and here looking out at the window.

Art thou his father? Ay, sir, so his mother says, if I may believe her.

is flat knavery, to take upon you another man's name.

Lay hands on the villain: I believe a' means to cozen somebody in this city under my countenance.

Re-enter BIONDELLO I have seen them in the church together: God send 'em good shipping! But who is here? mine old master Vincentio! now we are undone and brought to nothing.

What, have you forgot me? Forgot you! no, sir: I could not forget you, for I never saw you before in all my life.

What, you notorious villain, didst thou never see thy master's father, Vincentio? What, my old worshipful old master? yes, marry, sir: see where he looks out of the window.

Beats BIONDELLO Help, help, help! here's a madman will murder me.

Help, son! help, Signior Baptista! Prithee, Kate, let's stand aside and see the end of this controversy.

How now! what's the matter? What, is the man lunatic? Sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your habit, but your words show you a madman.

Why, sir, what 'cerns it you if I wear pearl and gold? I thank my good father, I am able to maintain it.

Thy father! O villain! he is a sailmaker in Bergamo.

Pray, what do you think is his name? His name! as if I knew not his name: I have brought him up ever since he was three years old, and his name is Tranio.

Away, away, mad ass! his name is Lucentio and he is mine only son, and heir to the lands of me, Signior Vincentio.

Lucentio! O, he hath murdered his master! Lay hold on him, I charge you, in the duke's name.

O, my son, my son! Tell me, thou villain, where is my son Lucentio? Call forth an officer.

Father Baptista, I charge you see that he be forthcoming.

Carry me to the gaol! Stay, officer: he shall not go to prison.

Talk not, Signior Gremio: I say he shall go to prison.

Take heed, Signior Baptista, lest you be cony-catched in this business: I dare swear this is the right Vincentio.

How hast thou offended? Where is Lucentio? Here's Lucentio, Right son to the right Vincentio, That have by marriage made thy daughter mine, While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.

Here's packing, with a witness to deceive us all! Where is that damned villain Tranio, That faced and braved me in this matter so? Why, tell me, is not this my Cambio? Cambio is changed into Lucentio.

Bianca's love Made me exchange my state with Tranio, While he did bear my countenance in the town, And happily I have arrived at the last Unto the wished haven of my bliss.

What Tranio did, myself enforced him to, Then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.

I'll slit the villain's nose, that would have sent me to the gaol.

But do you hear, sir? have you married my daughter without asking my good will? Fear not, Baptista, we will content you, go to: but I will in, to be revenged for this villany.

My cake is dough, but I'll in among the rest, Out of hope of all, but my share of the feast.

Husband, let's follow, to see the end of this ado.

What, in the midst of the street? What, art thou ashamed of me? No, sir, God forbid, but ashamed to kiss.

Come, sirrah, let's away. Nay, I will give thee a kiss: now pray thee, love, stay.

Is not this well? Come, my sweet Kate: Better once than never, for never too late.

At last, though long, our jarring notes agree: And time it is, when raging war is done, To smile at scapes and perils overblown.

My fair Bianca, bid my father welcome, While I with self-same kindness welcome thine.

Brother Petruchio, sister Katharina, And thou, Hortensio, with thy loving widow, Feast with the best, and welcome to my house: My banquet is to close our stomachs up, After our great good cheer.

Pray you, sit down, For now we sit to chat as well as eat.

Nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat! Padua affords this kindness, son Petruchio.

You are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense: I mean, Hortensio is afeard of you.

Mistress, how mean you that? Thus I conceive by him.

Conceives by me! How likes Hortensio that? My widow says, thus she conceives her tale.

Kiss him for that, good widow. 'He that is giddy thinks the world turns round:' I pray you, tell me what you meant by that.

Your husband, being troubled with a shrew, Measures my husband's sorrow by his woe: And now you know my meaning, A very mean meaning.

To her, Kate! To her, widow! A hundred marks, my Kate does put her down.

Spoke like an officer, ha' to thee, lad! Drinks to HORTENSIO How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks? Believe me, sir, they butt together well.

Head, and butt! an hasty-witted body Would say your head and butt were head and horn.

Ay, mistress bride, hath that awaken'd you? Ay, but not frighted me, therefore I'll sleep again.

Nay, that you shall not: since you have begun, Have at you for a bitter jest or two! Am I your bird? I mean to shift my bush, And then pursue me as you draw your bow.

Here, Signior Tranio. This bird you aim'd at, though you hit her not, Therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd.

O, sir, Lucentio slipp'd me like his greyhound, Which runs himself and catches for his master.

'Tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself: 'Tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.

Confess, confess, hath he not hit you here? A' has a little gall'd me, I confess, And, as the jest did glance away from me, 'Tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright.

Now, in good sadness, son Petruchio, I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all.

Well, I say no: and therefore for assurance Let's each one send unto his wife, And he whose wife is most obedient To come at first when he doth send for her, Shall win the wager which we will propose.

Twenty crowns! I'll venture so much of my hawk or hound, But twenty times so much upon my wife.

Re-enter BIONDELLO How now! what news? Sir, my mistress sends you word That she is busy and she cannot come.

How! she is busy and she cannot come! Is that an answer? Ay, and a kind one too: Pray God, sir, your wife send you not a worse.

Sirrah Biondello, go and entreat my wife To come to me forthwith.

O, ho! entreat her! Nay, then she must needs come.

I am afraid, sir, Do what you can, yours will not be entreated.

Re-enter BIONDELLO Now, where's my wife? She says you have some goodly jest in hand: She will not come: she bids you come to her.

Worse and worse, she will not come! O vile, Intolerable, not to be endured! Sirrah Grumio, go to your mistress, Say, I command her to come to me.

Now, by my holidame, here comes Katharina! Re-enter KATARINA What is your will, sir, that you send for me? Where is your sister, and Hortensio's wife? They sit conferring by the parlor fire.

Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands: Away, I say, and bring them hither straight.

Nay, I will win my wager better yet And show more sign of her obedience, Her new-built virtue and obedience.

See where she comes and brings your froward wives As prisoners to her womanly persuasion.

Re-enter KATHARINA, with BIANCA and Widow Katharina, that cap of yours becomes you not: Off with that bauble, throw it under-foot.

Katharina, I charge thee, tell these headstrong women What duty they do owe their lords and husbands.

Come, come, you're mocking: we will have no telling.

A woman moved is like a fountain troubled, Muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty, And while it is so, none so dry or thirsty Will deign to sip or touch one drop of it.

Then vail your stomachs, for it is no boot, And place your hands below your husband's foot: In token of which duty, if he please, My hand is ready, may it do him ease.

To LUCENTIO 'Twas I won the wager, though you hit the white, And, being a winner, God give you good night! Now, go thy ways, thou hast tamed a curst shrew.

'Tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamed so.

Here, master: what cheer? Good, speak to the mariners: fall to't, yarely, or we run ourselves aground: bestir, bestir.

Heigh, my hearts! cheerly, cheerly, my hearts! yare, yare! Take in the topsail.

Blow, till thou burst thy wind, if room enough! Good boatswain, have care.

Where is the master, boatswain? Do you not hear him? You mar our labour: keep your cabins: you do assist the storm.

Hence! What cares these roarers for the name of king? To cabin: silence! trouble us not.

I have great comfort from this fellow: methinks he hath no drowning mark upon him, his complexion is perfect gallows.

Stand fast, good Fate, to his hanging: make the rope of his destiny our cable, for our own doth little advantage.

If he be not born to be hanged, our case is miserable.

Re-enter Boatswain Down with the topmast! yare! lower, lower! Bring her to try with main-course.

A cry within A plague upon this howling! they are louder than the weather or our office.

Hang, cur! hang, you whoreson, insolent noisemaker! We are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.

I'll warrant him for drowning, though the ship were no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky as an unstanched wench.

Lay her a-hold, a-hold! set her two courses off to sea again, lay her off.

All lost! to prayers, to prayers! all lost! What, must our mouths be cold? The king and prince at prayers! let's assist them, For our case is as theirs.

A confused noise within:   'Mercy on us!'--  'We split, we split!'--'Farewell, my wife and  children!'-- 'Farewell, brother!'--'We split, we split, we split!' Let's all sink with the king.

Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of barren ground, long heath, brown furze, any thing.

The wills above be done! but I would fain die a dry death.

If by your art, my dearest father, you have Put the wild waters in this roar, allay them.

The sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch, But that the sea, mounting to the welkin's cheek, Dashes the fire out.

O, I have suffered With those that I saw suffer: a brave vessel, Who had, no doubt, some noble creature in her, Dash'd all to pieces.

Poor souls, they perish'd. Had I been any god of power, I would Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere It should the good ship so have swallow'd and The fraughting souls within her.

Be collected: No more amazement: tell your piteous heart There's no harm done.

Lend thy hand, And pluck my magic garment from me.

You have often Begun to tell me what I am, but stopp'd And left me to a bootless inquisition, Concluding 'Stay: not yet.

The hour's now come, The very minute bids thee ope thine ear, Obey and be attentive.

Canst thou remember A time before we came unto this cell? I do not think thou canst, for then thou wast not Out three years old.

By what? by any other house or person? Of any thing the image tell me that Hath kept with thy remembrance.

'Tis far off And rather like a dream than an assurance That my remembrance warrants.

Had I not Four or five women once that tended me? Thou hadst, and more, Miranda.

But how is it That this lives in thy mind? What seest thou else In the dark backward and abysm of time? If thou remember'st aught ere thou camest here, How thou camest here thou mayst.

Twelve year since, Miranda, twelve year since, Thy father was the Duke of Milan and A prince of power.

Sir, are not you my father? Thy mother was a piece of virtue, and She said thou wast my daughter, and thy father Was Duke of Milan, and thou his only heir And princess no worse issued.

O the heavens! What foul play had we, that we came from thence? Or blessed was't we did? Both, both, my girl: By foul play, as thou say'st, were we heaved thence, But blessedly holp hither.

O, my heart bleeds To think o' the teen that I have turn'd you to, Which is from my remembrance! Please you, farther.

Thy false uncle-- Dost thou attend me? Sir, most heedfully.

To have no screen between this part he play'd And him he play'd it for, he needs will be Absolute Milan.

O the heavens! Mark his condition and the event, then tell me If this might be a brother.

I should sin To think but nobly of my grandmother: Good wombs have borne bad sons.

Alack, for pity! I, not remembering how I cried out then, Will cry it o'er again: it is a hint That wrings mine eyes to't.

Hear a little further And then I'll bring thee to the present business Which now's upon's, without the which this story Were most impertinent.

Wherefore did they not That hour destroy us? Well demanded, wench: My tale provokes that question.

Dear, they durst not, So dear the love my people bore me, nor set A mark so bloody on the business, but With colours fairer painted their foul ends.

Alack, what trouble Was I then to you! O, a cherubim Thou wast that did preserve me.

Would I might But ever see that man! Now I arise: Resumes his mantle Sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow.

Here in this island we arrived, and here Have I, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit Than other princesses can that have more time For vainer hours and tutors not so careful.

Heavens thank you for't! And now, I pray you, sir, For still 'tis beating in my mind, your reason For raising this sea-storm? Know thus far forth.

Here cease more questions: Thou art inclined to sleep, 'tis a good dulness, And give it way: I know thou canst not choose.

Hast thou, spirit, Perform'd to point the tempest that I bade thee? To every article.

My brave spirit! Who was so firm, so constant, that this coil Would not infect his reason? Not a soul But felt a fever of the mad and play'd Some tricks of desperation.

Why that's my spirit! But was not this nigh shore? Close by, my master.

But are they, Ariel, safe? Not a hair perish'd, On their sustaining garments not a blemish, But fresher than before: and, as thou badest me, In troops I have dispersed them 'bout the isle.

The king's son have I landed by himself, Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs In an odd angle of the isle and sitting, His arms in this sad knot.

Of the king's ship The mariners say how thou hast disposed And all the rest o' the fleet.

Ariel, thy charge Exactly is perform'd: but there's more work.

The time 'twixt six and now Must by us both be spent most preciously.

Is there more toil? Since thou dost give me pains, Let me remember thee what thou hast promised, Which is not yet perform'd me.

How now? moody? What is't thou canst demand? My liberty.

Thou liest, malignant thing! Hast thou forgot The foul witch Sycorax, who with age and envy Was grown into a hoop? hast thou forgot her? No, sir.

Where was she born? speak, tell me. Sir, in Argier.

O, was she so? I must Once in a month recount what thou hast been, Which thou forget'st.

This damn'd witch Sycorax, For mischiefs manifold and sorceries terrible To enter human hearing, from Argier, Thou know'st, was banish'd: for one thing she did They would not take her life.

This blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child And here was left by the sailors.

Then was this island-- Save for the son that she did litter here, A freckled whelp hag-born--not honour'd with A human shape.

Dull thing, I say so, he, that Caliban Whom now I keep in service.

If thou more murmur'st, I will rend an oak And peg thee in his knotty entrails till Thou hast howl'd away twelve winters.

Pardon, master, I will be correspondent to command And do my spiriting gently.

That's my noble master! What shall I do? say what, what shall I do? Go make thyself like a nymph o' the sea: be subject To no sight but thine and mine, invisible To every eyeball else.

Go take this shape And hither come in't: go, hence with diligence! Awake, dear heart, awake! thou hast slept well, Awake! The strangeness of your story put Heaviness in me.

Come on, We'll visit Caliban my slave, who never Yields us kind answer.

But, as 'tis, We cannot miss him: he does make our fire, Fetch in our wood and serves in offices That profit us.

What, ho! slave! Caliban! Thou earth, thou! speak.

Come forth, I say! there's other business for thee: Come, thou tortoise! when? Re-enter ARIEL like a water-nymph Fine apparition! My quaint Ariel, Hark in thine ear.

This island's mine, by Sycorax my mother, Which thou takest from me.

O ho, O ho! would't had been done! Thou didst prevent me, I had peopled else This isle with Calibans.

But thy vile race, Though thou didst learn, had that in't which good natures Could not abide to be with, therefore wast thou Deservedly confined into this rock, Who hadst deserved more than a prison.

You taught me language, and my profit on't Is, I know how to curse.

The red plague rid you For learning me your language! Hag-seed, hence! Fetch us in fuel, and be quick, thou'rt best, To answer other business.

Shrug'st thou, malice? If thou neglect'st or dost unwillingly What I command, I'll rack thee with old cramps, Fill all thy bones with aches, make thee roar That beasts shall tremble at thy din.

I must obey: his art is of such power, It would control my dam's god, Setebos, and make a vassal of him.

So, slave, hence! Re-enter ARIEL, invisible, playing and singing, FERDINAND following ARIEL'S song.

Come unto these yellow sands, And then take hands: Courtsied when you have and kiss'd The wild waves whist, Foot it featly here and there, And, sweet sprites, the burthen bear.

Hark, hark! Burthen The watch-dogs bark! Burthen Bow-wow Hark, hark! I hear The strain of strutting chanticleer Cry, Cock-a-diddle-dow.

Where should this music be? i' the air or the earth? It sounds no more: and sure, it waits upon Some god o' the island.

Sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell Burthen Ding-dong Hark! now I hear them,--Ding-dong, bell.

This is no mortal business, nor no sound That the earth owes.

I hear it now above me. The fringed curtains of thine eye advance And say what thou seest yond.

What is't? a spirit? Lord, how it looks about! Believe me, sir, It carries a brave form.

But 'tis a spirit. No, wench, it eats and sleeps and hath such senses As we have, such.

I might call him A thing divine, for nothing natural I ever saw so noble.

Spirit, fine spirit! I'll free thee Within two days for this.

My language! heavens! I am the best of them that speak this speech, Were I but where 'tis spoken.

How? the best? What wert thou, if the King of Naples heard thee? A single thing, as I am now, that wonders To hear thee speak of Naples.

He does hear me, And that he does I weep: myself am Naples, Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld The king my father wreck'd.

Alack, for mercy! Yes, faith, and all his lords, the Duke of Milan And his brave son being twain.

And his more braver daughter could control thee, If now 'twere fit to do't.

To FERDINAND A word, good sir, I fear you have done yourself some wrong: a word.

They are both in either's powers, but this swift business I must uneasy make, lest too light winning Make the prize light.

To FERDINAND One word more, I charge thee That thou attend me: thou dost here usurp The name thou owest not, and hast put thyself Upon this island as a spy, to win it From me, the lord on't.

There's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple: If the ill spirit have so fair a house, Good things will strive to dwell with't.

Come, I'll manacle thy neck and feet together: Sea-water shalt thou drink, thy food shall be The fresh-brook muscles, wither'd roots and husks Wherein the acorn cradled.

Follow. I will resist such entertainment till Mine enemy has more power.

Draws, and is charmed from moving O dear father, Make not too rash a trial of him, for He's gentle and not fearful.

Silence! one word more Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee.

My affections Are then most humble, I have no ambition To see a goodlier man.

Come on, obey: Thy nerves are in their infancy again And have no vigour in them.

So they are, My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.

Thou hast done well, fine Ariel! To FERDINAND Follow me.

Be of comfort, My father's of a better nature, sir, Than he appears by speech: this is unwonted Which now came from him.

Thou shalt be free As mountain winds: but then exactly do All points of my command.

Speak not for him. Beseech you, sir, be merry, you have cause, So have we all, of joy, for our escape Is much beyond our loss.

Look he's winding up the watch of his wit, by and by it will strike.

When every grief is entertain'd that's offer'd, Comes to the entertainer-- A dollar.

Dolour comes to him, indeed: you have spoken truer than you purposed.

You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should.

Therefore, my lord,-- Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue! I prithee, spare.

Which, of he or Adrian, for a good wager, first begins to crow? The old cock.

A match! Though this island seem to be desert,-- Ha, ha, ha! So, you're paid.

Uninhabitable and almost inaccessible,-- He could not miss't.

It must needs be of subtle, tender and delicate Temperance was a delicate wench.

How lush and lusty the grass looks! how green! The ground indeed is tawny.

But the rarity of it is,--which is indeed almost beyond credit,-- As many vouched rarities are.

That our garments, being, as they were, drenched in the sea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with salt water.

'Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.

Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to their queen.

His word is more than the miraculous harp, he hath raised the wall and houses too.

What impossible matter will he make easy next? I think he will carry this island home in his pocket and give it his son for an apple.

And, sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring forth more islands.

Sir, we were talking that our garments seem now as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage of your daughter, who is now queen.

Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I wore it? I mean, in a sort.

When I wore it at your daughter's marriage? You cram these words into mine ears against The stomach of my sense.

Would I had never Married my daughter there! for, coming thence, My son is lost and, in my rate, she too, Who is so far from Italy removed I ne'er again shall see her.

You were kneel'd to and importuned otherwise By all of us, and the fair soul herself Weigh'd between loathness and obedience, at Which end o' the beam should bow.

We have lost your I fear, for ever: Milan and Naples have More widows in them of this business' making Than we bring men to comfort them: The fault's your own.

My lord Sebastian, The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness And time to speak it in: you rub the sore, When you should bring the plaster.

It is foul weather in us all, good sir, When you are cloudy.

Had I plantation of this isle, my lord,-- He'ld sow't with nettle-seed.

And were the king on't, what would I do? 'Scape being drunk for want of wine.

No marrying 'mong his subjects? None, man, all idle: whores and knaves.

I would with such perfection govern, sir, To excel the golden age.

God save his majesty! Long live Gonzalo! And,--do you mark me, sir? Prithee, no more: thou dost talk nothing to me.

I do well believe your highness, and did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen, who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that they always use to laugh at nothing.

Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing to you: so you may continue and laugh at nothing still.

What a blow was there given! An it had not fallen flat-long.

You are gentlemen of brave metal, you would lift the moon out of her sphere, if she would continue in it five weeks without changing.

No, I warrant you, I will not adventure my discretion so weakly.

Will you laugh me asleep, for I am very heavy? Go sleep, and hear us.

All sleep except ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, and ANTONIO What, all so soon asleep! I wish mine eyes Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts: I find They are inclined to do so.

Please you, sir, Do not omit the heavy offer of it: It seldom visits sorrow, when it doth, It is a comforter.

We two, my lord, Will guard your person while you take your rest, And watch your safety.

Exit ARIEL What a strange drowsiness possesses them! It is the quality o' the climate.

Doth it not then our eyelids sink? I find not Myself disposed to sleep.

They fell together all, as by consent, They dropp'd, as by a thunder-stroke.

What, art thou waking? Do you not hear me speak? I do, and surely It is a sleepy language and thou speak'st Out of thy sleep.

What is it thou didst say? This is a strange repose, to be asleep With eyes wide open, standing, speaking, moving, And yet so fast asleep.

Noble Sebastian, Thou let'st thy fortune sleep--die, rather, wink'st Whiles thou art waking.

Thou dost snore distinctly, There's meaning in thy snores.

I am more serious than my custom: you Must be so too, if heed me, which to do Trebles thee o'er.

If you but knew how you the purpose cherish Whiles thus you mock it! how, in stripping it, You more invest it! Ebbing men, indeed, Most often do so near the bottom run By their own fear or sloth.

Prithee, say on: The setting of thine eye and cheek proclaim A matter from thee, and a birth indeed Which throes thee much to yield.

O, out of that 'no hope' What great hope have you! no hope that way is Another way so high a hope that even Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond, But doubt discovery there.

Will you grant with me That Ferdinand is drown'd? He's gone.

What stuff is this! how say you? 'Tis true, my brother's daughter's queen of Tunis, So is she heir of Naples, 'twixt which regions There is some space.

A space whose every cubit Seems to cry out, 'How shall that Claribel Measure us back to Naples? Keep in Tunis, And let Sebastian wake.

Say, this were death That now hath seized them, why, they were no worse Than now they are.

There be that can rule Naples As well as he that sleeps, lords that can prate As amply and unnecessarily As this Gonzalo, I myself could make A chough of as deep chat.

O, that you bore The mind that I do! what a sleep were this For your advancement! Do you understand me? Methinks I do.

And how does your content Tender your own good fortune? I remember You did supplant your brother Prospero.

And look how well my garments sit upon me, Much feater than before: my brother's servants Were then my fellows, now they are my men.

For all the rest, They'll take suggestion as a cat laps milk, They'll tell the clock to any business that We say befits the hour.

Thy case, dear friend, Shall be my precedent, as thou got'st Milan, I'll come by Naples.

Draw thy sword: one stroke Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest, And I the king shall love thee.

Draw together, And when I rear my hand, do you the like, To fall it on Gonzalo.

They talk apart Re-enter ARIEL, invisible My master through his art foresees the danger That you, his friend, are in, and sends me forth-- For else his project dies--to keep them living.

Sings in GONZALO's ear While you here do snoring lie, Open-eyed conspiracy His time doth take.

If of life you keep a care, Shake off slumber, and beware: Awake, awake! Then let us both be sudden.

O, 'twas a din to fright a monster's ear, To make an earthquake! sure, it was the roar Of a whole herd of lions.

'Tis best we stand upon our guard, Or that we quit this place, let's draw our weapons.

Lead off this ground, and let's make further search For my poor son.

Heavens keep him from these beasts! For he is, sure, i' the island.

Prospero my lord shall know what I have done: So, king, go safely on to seek thy son.

All the infections that the sun sucks up From bogs, fens, flats, on Prosper fall and make him By inch-meal a disease! His spirits hear me And yet I needs must curse.

Lo, now, lo! Here comes a spirit of his, and to torment me For bringing wood in slowly.

If it should thunder as it did before, I know not where to hide my head: yond same cloud cannot choose but fall by pailfuls.

What have we here? a man or a fish? dead or alive? A fish: he smells like a fish, a very ancient and fish- like smell, a kind of not of the newest Poor- John.

I will here shroud till the dregs of the storm be past.

I shall no more to sea, to sea, Here shall I die ashore-- This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man's funeral: well, here's my comfort.

The spirit torments me, Oh! This is some monster of the isle with four legs, who hath got, as I take it, an ague.

Where the devil should he learn our language? I will give him some relief, if it be but for that.

if I can recover him and keep him tame and get to Naples with him, he's a present for any emperor that ever trod on neat's leather.

Do not torment me, prithee, I'll bring my wood home faster.

He's in his fit now and does not talk after the wisest.

He shall taste of my bottle: if he have never drunk wine afore will go near to remove his fit.

If I can recover him and keep him tame, I will not take too much for him, he shall pay for him that hath him, and that soundly.

Thou dost me yet but little hurt, thou wilt anon, I know it by thy trembling: now Prosper works upon thee.

If all the wine in my bottle will recover him, I will help his ague.

Doth thy other mouth call me? Mercy, mercy! This is a devil, and no monster: I will leave him, I have no long spoon.

Stephano! If thou beest Stephano, touch me and speak to me: for I am Trinculo--be not afeard--thy good friend Trinculo.

If thou beest Trinculo, come forth: I'll pull thee by the lesser legs: if any be Trinculo's legs, these are they.

Thou art very Trinculo indeed! How camest thou to be the siege of this moon-calf? can he vent Trinculos? I took him to be killed with a thunder-stroke.

But art thou not drowned, Stephano? I hope now thou art not drowned.

Is the storm overblown? I hid me under the dead moon-calf's gaberdine for fear of the storm.

And art thou living, Stephano? O Stephano, two Neapolitans 'scaped! Prithee, do not turn me about, my stomach is not constant.

How didst thou 'scape? How camest thou hither? swear by this bottle how thou camest hither.

I escaped upon a butt of sack which the sailors heaved o'erboard, by this bottle, which I made of the bark of a tree with mine own hands since I was cast ashore.

I'll swear upon that bottle to be thy true subject, for the liquor is not earthly.

man, like a duck: I can swim like a duck, I'll be sworn.

Though thou canst swim like a duck, thou art made like a goose.

hast any more of this? The whole butt, man: my cellar is in a rock by the sea-side where my wine is hid.

How now, moon-calf! how does thine ague? Hast thou not dropp'd from heaven? Out o' the moon, I do assure thee: I was the man i' the moon when time was.

I have seen thee in her and I do adore thee: My mistress show'd me thee and thy dog and thy bush.

Come, swear to that, kiss the book: I will furnish it anon with new contents swear.

By this light, a most perfidious and drunken monster! when 's god's asleep, he'll rob his bottle.

I'll kiss thy foot, I'll swear myself thy subject.

I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed monster.

A most scurvy monster! I could find in my heart to beat him,-- Come, kiss.

But that the poor monster's in drink: an abominable monster! I'll show thee the best springs, I'll pluck thee berries, I'll fish for thee and get thee wood enough.

A plague upon the tyrant that I serve! I'll bear him no more sticks, but follow thee, Thou wondrous man.

Wilt thou go with me? I prithee now, lead the way without any more talking.

Trinculo, the king and all our company else being drowned, we will inherit here: here, bear my bottle: fellow Trinculo, we'll fill him by and by again.

Freedom, hey-day! hey-day, freedom! freedom, hey-day, freedom! O brave monster! Lead the way.

There be some sports are painful, and their labour Delight in them sets off: some kinds of baseness Are nobly undergone and most poor matters Point to rich ends.

I must remove Some thousands of these logs and pile them up, Upon a sore injunction: my sweet mistress Weeps when she sees me work, and says, such baseness Had never like executor.

I forget: But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labours, Most busy lest, when I do it.

Alas, now, pray you, Work not so hard: I would the lightning had Burnt up those logs that you are enjoin'd to pile! Pray, set it down and rest you: when this burns, 'Twill weep for having wearied you.

My father Is hard at study, pray now, rest yourself, He's safe for these three hours.

O most dear mistress, The sun will set before I shall discharge What I must strive to do.

If you'll sit down, I'll bear your logs the while: pray, give me that, I'll carry it to the pile.

No, precious creature, I had rather crack my sinews, break my back, Than you should such dishonour undergo, While I sit lazy by.

It would become me As well as it does you: and I should do it With much more ease, for my good will is to it, And yours it is against.

Poor worm, thou art infected! This visitation shows it.

No, noble mistress,'tis fresh morning with me When you are by at night.

I do beseech you-- Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers-- What is your name? Miranda.

But I prattle Something too wildly and my father's precepts I therein do forget.

I am in my condition A prince, Miranda, I do think, a king, I would, not so!--and would no more endure This wooden slavery than to suffer The flesh-fly blow my mouth.

Hear my soul speak: The very instant that I saw you, did My heart fly to your service, there resides, To make me slave to it, and for your sake Am I this patient log--man.

But this is trifling, And all the more it seeks to hide itself, The bigger bulk it shows.

My husband, then? Ay, with a heart as willing As bondage e'er of freedom: here's my hand.

And mine, with my heart in't, and now farewell Till half an hour hence.

A thousand thousand! So glad of this as they I cannot be, Who are surprised withal, but my rejoicing At nothing can be more.

I'll to my book, For yet ere supper-time must I perform Much business appertaining.

Tell not me, when the butt is out, we will drink water, not a drop before: therefore bear up, and board 'em.

Servant-monster, drink to me. Servant-monster! the folly of this island! They say there's but five upon this isle: we are three of them, if th' other two be brained like us, the state totters.

Drink, servant-monster, when I bid thee: thy eyes are almost set in thy head.

Where should they be set else? he were a brave monster indeed, if they were set in his tail.

My man-monster hath drown'd his tongue in sack: for my part, the sea cannot drown me, I swam, ere I could recover the shore, five and thirty leagues off and on.

By this light, thou shalt be my lieutenant, monster, or my standard.

Nor go neither, but you'll lie like dogs and yet say nothing neither.

Moon-calf, speak once in thy life, if thou beest a good moon-calf.

Thou liest, most ignorant monster: I am in case to justle a constable.

Trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head: if you prove a mutineer,--the next tree! The poor monster's my subject and he shall not suffer indignity.

Wilt thou be pleased to hearken once again to the suit I made to thee? Marry, will I	kneel and repeat it, I will stand, and so shall Trinculo.

As I told thee before, I am subject to a tyrant, a sorcerer, that by his cunning hath cheated me of the island.

Thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou: I would my valiant master would destroy thee! I do not lie.

Trinculo, if you trouble him any more in's tale, by this hand, I will supplant some of your teeth.

Proceed. I say, by sorcery he got this isle, From me he got it.

if thy greatness will Revenge it on him,--for I know thou darest, But this thing dare not,-- That's most certain.

How now shall this be compassed? Canst thou bring me to the party? Yea, yea, my lord: I'll yield him thee asleep, Where thou mayst knock a nail into his bead.

Trinculo, run into no further danger: interrupt the monster one word further, and, by this hand, I'll turn my mercy out o' doors and make a stock-fish of thee.

I'll go farther Didst thou not say he lied? Thou liest.

Beats TRINCULO As you like this, give me the lie another time.

Out o' your wits and bearing too? A pox o' your bottle! this can sack and drinking do.

A murrain on your monster, and the devil take your fingers! Ha, ha, ha! Now, forward with your tale.

Prithee, stand farther Beat him enough: after a little time I'll beat him too.

Remember First to possess his books, for without them He's but a sot, as I am, nor hath not One spirit to command: they all do hate him As rootedly as I.

Is it so brave a lass? Ay, lord, she will become thy bed, I warrant.

Monster, I will kill this man: his daughter and I will be king and queen--save our graces!--and Trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys.

Dost thou like the plot, Trinculo? Give me thy hand: I am sorry I beat thee, but, while thou livest, keep a good tongue in thy head.

Within this half hour will he be asleep: Wilt thou destroy him then? Ay, on mine honour.

Thou makest me merry, I am full of pleasure: Let us be jocund: will you troll the catch You taught me but while-ere? At thy request, monster, I will do reason, any reason.

Come on, Trinculo, let us sing. Flout 'em and scout 'em And scout 'em and flout 'em Thought is free.

Ariel plays the tune on a tabour and pipe What is this same? This is the tune of our catch, played by the picture of Nobody.

If thou beest a man, show thyself in thy likeness: if thou beest a devil, take't as thou list.

O, forgive me my sins! He that dies pays all debts: I defy thee.

Mercy upon us! Art thou afeard? No, monster, not I.

Be not afeard, the isle is full of noises, Sounds and sweet airs, that give delight and hurt not.

This will prove a brave kingdom to me, where I shall have my music for nothing.

The sound is going away, let's follow it, and after do our work.

By'r lakin, I can go no further, sir, My old bones ache: here's a maze trod indeed Through forth-rights and meanders! By your patience, I needs must rest me.

Old lord, I cannot blame thee, Who am myself attach'd with weariness, To the dulling of my spirits: sit down, and rest.

Even here I will put off my hope and keep it No longer for my flatterer: he is drown'd Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks Our frustrate search on land.

Do not, for one repulse, forego the purpose That you resolved to effect.

For, now they are oppress'd with travel, they Will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance As when they are fresh.

Solemn and strange music What harmony is this? My good friends, hark! Marvellous sweet music! Give us kind keepers, heavens! What were these? A living drollery.

Now I will believe That there are unicorns, that in Arabia There is one tree, the phoenix' throne, one phoenix At this hour reigning there.

I'll believe both, And what does else want credit, come to me, And I'll be sworn 'tis true: travellers ne'er did Though fools at home condemn 'em.

Thou hast said well, for some of you there present Are worse than devils.

I cannot too much muse Such shapes, such gesture and such sound, expressing, Although they want the use of tongue, a kind Of excellent dumb discourse.

No matter, since They have left their viands behind, for we have stomachs.

I will stand to and feed, Although my last: no matter, since I feel The best is past.

I have made you mad, And even with such-like valour men hang and drown Their proper selves.

If you could hurt, Your swords are now too massy for your strengths And will not be uplifted.

Therefore my son i' the ooze is bedded, and I'll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded And with him there lie mudded.

But one fiend at a time, I'll fight their legions o'er.

All three of them are desperate: their great guilt, Like poison given to work a great time after, Now 'gins to bite the spirits.

I do beseech you That are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly And hinder them from what this ecstasy May now provoke them to.

O Ferdinand, Do not smile at me that I boast her off, For thou shalt find she will outstrip all praise And make it halt behind her.

As I hope For quiet days, fair issue and long life, With such love as 'tis now, the murkiest den, The most opportune place, the strong'st suggestion.

Our worser genius can, shall never melt Mine honour into lust, to take away The edge of that day's celebration When I shall think: or Phoebus' steeds are founder'd, Or Night kept chain'd below.

What, Ariel! my industrious servant, Ariel! What would my potent master? here I am.

Thou and thy meaner fellows your last service Did worthily perform, and I must use you In such another trick.

Before you can say 'come' and 'go,' And breathe twice and cry 'so, so,' Each one, tripping on his toe, Will be here with mop and mow.

Do you love me, master? no? Dearly my delicate Ariel.

Now come, my Ariel! bring a corollary, Rather than want a spirit: appear and pertly! No tongue! all eyes! be silent.

Of her society Be not afraid: I met her deity Cutting the clouds towards Paphos and her son Dove-drawn with her.

High'st queen of state, Great Juno, comes, I know her by her gait.

How does my bounteous sister? Go with me To bless this twain, that they may prosperous be And honour'd in their issue.

They sing: Honour, riches, marriage-blessing, Long continuance, and increasing, Hourly joys be still upon you! Juno sings her blessings upon you.

This is a most majestic vision, and Harmoniously charmingly.

May I be bold To think these spirits? Spirits, which by mine art I have from their confines call'd to enact My present fancies.

Let me live here ever, So rare a wonder'd father and a wife Makes this place Paradise.

Juno and Ceres whisper, and send Iris on employment Sweet, now, silence! Juno and Ceres whisper seriously, There's something else to do: hush, and be mute, Or else our spell is marr'd.

You sunburnt sicklemen, of August weary, Come hither from the furrow and be merry: Make holiday, your rye-straw hats put on And these fresh nymphs encounter every one In country footing.

Of the beast Caliban and his confederates Against my life: the minute of their plot Is almost come.

To the Spirits Well done! avoid, no more! This is strange: your father's in some passion That works him strongly.

Never till this day Saw I him touch'd with anger so distemper'd.

You do look, my son, in a moved sort, As if you were dismay'd: be cheerful, sir.

We are such stuff As dreams are made on, and our little life Is rounded with a sleep.

What's thy pleasure? We must prepare to meet with Caliban.

Ay, my commander: when I presented Ceres, I thought to have told thee of it, but I fear'd Lest I might anger thee.

Thy shape invisible retain thou still: The trumpery in my house, go bring it hither, For stale to catch these thieves.

A devil, a born devil, on whose nature Nurture can never stick, on whom my pains, Humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost, And as with age his body uglier grows, So his mind cankers.

Re-enter ARIEL, loaden with glistering apparel,  and c Come, hang them on this line.

Enter CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and TRINCULO, all wet Pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole may not Hear a foot fall: we now are near his cell.

Monster, your fairy, which you say is a harmless fairy, has done little better than played the Jack with us.

Monster, I do smell all horse-piss, at which my nose is in great indignation.

Do you hear, monster? If I should take a displeasure against you, look you,-- Thou wert but a lost monster.

Be patient, for the prize I'll bring thee to Shall hoodwink this mischance: therefore speak softly.

Ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool,-- There is not only disgrace and dishonour in that, monster, but an infinite loss.

That's more to me than my wetting: yet this is your harmless fairy, monster.

I will fetch off my bottle, though I be o'er ears for my labour.

Seest thou here, This is the mouth o' the cell: no noise, and enter.

Do that good mischief which may make this island Thine own for ever, and I, thy Caliban, For aye thy foot-licker.

I do begin to have bloody thoughts. O king Stephano! O peer! O worthy Stephano! look what a wardrobe here is for thee! Let it alone, thou fool, it is but trash.

O, ho, monster! we know what belongs to a frippery.

O king Stephano! Put off that gown, Trinculo, by this hand, I'll have that gown.

Mistress line, is not this my jerkin? Now is the jerkin under the line: now, jerkin, you are like to lose your hair and prove a bald jerkin.

Do, do: we steal by line and level, an't like your grace.

I thank thee for that jest, here's a garment for't: wit shall not go unrewarded while I am king of this country.

'Steal by line and level' is an excellent pass of pate, there's another garment for't.

Monster, come, put some lime upon your fingers, and away with the rest.

I will have none on't: we shall lose our time, And all be turn'd to barnacles, or to apes With foreheads villanous low.

Monster, lay-to your fingers: help to bear this away where my hogshead of wine is, or I'll turn you out of my kingdom: go to, carry this.

At this hour Lie at my mercy all mine enemies: Shortly shall all my labours end, and thou Shalt have the air at freedom: for a little Follow, and do me service.

Now does my project gather to a head: My charms crack not, my spirits obey, and time Goes upright with his carriage.

How's the day? On the sixth hour, at which time, my lord, You said our work should cease.

Your charm so strongly works 'em That if you now beheld them, your affections Would become tender.

Dost thou think so, spirit? Mine would, sir, were I human.

Go release them, Ariel: My charms I'll break, their senses I'll restore, And they shall be themselves.

Holy Gonzalo, honourable man, Mine eyes, even sociable to the show of thine, Fall fellowly drops.

The charm dissolves apace, And as the morning steals upon the night, Melting the darkness, so their rising senses Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle Their clearer reason.

O good Gonzalo, My true preserver, and a loyal sir To him you follow'st! I will pay thy graces Home both in word and deed.

Most cruelly Didst thou, Alonso, use me and my daughter: Thy brother was a furtherer in the act.

Their understanding Begins to swell, and the approaching tide Will shortly fill the reasonable shore That now lies foul and muddy.

ARIEL sings and helps to attire him Where the bee sucks.

there suck I: In a cowslip's bell I lie, There I couch when owls do cry.

Merrily, merrily shall I live now Under the blossom that hangs on the bough.

Why, that's my dainty Ariel! I shall miss thee: But yet thou shalt have freedom: so, so, so.

To the king's ship, invisible as thou art: There shalt thou find the mariners asleep Under the hatches, the master and the boatswain Being awake, enforce them to this place, And presently, I prithee.

I drink the air before me, and return Or ere your pulse twice beat.

Thy dukedom I resign and do entreat Thou pardon me my wrongs.

But how should Prospero Be living and be here? First, noble friend, Let me embrace thine age, whose honour cannot Be measured or confined.

You do yet taste Some subtilties o' the isle, that will not let you Believe things certain.

For you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother Would even infect my mouth, I do forgive Thy rankest fault, all of them, and require My dukedom of thee, which perforce, I know, Thou must restore.

Irreparable is the loss, and patience Says it is past her cure.

I rather think You have not sought her help, of whose soft grace For the like loss I have her sovereign aid And rest myself content.

You the like loss! As great to me as late, and, supportable To make the dear loss, have I means much weaker Than you may call to comfort you, for I Have lost my daughter.

A daughter? O heavens, that they were living both in Naples, The king and queen there! that they were, I wish Myself were mudded in that oozy bed Where my son lies.

When did you lose your daughter? In this last tempest.

No more yet of this, For 'tis a chronicle of day by day, Not a relation for a breakfast nor Befitting this first meeting.

Welcome, sir, This cell's my court: here have I few attendants And subjects none abroad: pray you, look in.

My dukedom since you have given me again, I will requite you with as good a thing, At least bring forth a wonder, to content ye As much as me my dukedom.

Here PROSPERO discovers FERDINAND and MIRANDA playing at chess Sweet lord, you play me false.

Yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle, And I would call it, fair play.

If this prove A vision of the Island, one dear son Shall I twice lose.

A most high miracle! Though the seas threaten, they are merciful, I have cursed them without cause.

Now all the blessings Of a glad father compass thee about! Arise, and say how thou camest here.

O, wonder! How many goodly creatures are there here! How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world, That has such people in't! 'Tis new to thee.

She Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan, Of whom so often I have heard renown, But never saw before, of whom I have Received a second life, and second father This lady makes him to me.

I am hers: But, O, how oddly will it sound that I Must ask my child forgiveness! There, sir, stop: Let us not burthen our remembrance with A heaviness that's gone.

Look down, you god, And on this couple drop a blessed crown! For it is you that have chalk'd forth the way Which brought us hither.

These are not natural events, they strengthen From strange to stranger.

Say, how came you hither? If I did think, sir, I were well awake, I'ld strive to tell you.

This is as strange a maze as e'er men trod And there is in this business more than nature Was ever conduct of: some oracle Must rectify our knowledge.

Aside to ARIEL Come hither, spirit: Set Caliban and his companions free, Untie the spell.

How fares my gracious sir? There are yet missing of your company Some few odd lads that you remember not.

Re-enter ARIEL, driving in CALIBAN, STEPHANO and TRINCULO, in their stolen apparel Every man shift for all the rest, and let no man take care for himself, for all is but fortune.

Coragio, bully-monster, coragio! If these be true spies which I wear in my head, here's a goodly sight.

O Setebos, these be brave spirits indeed! How fine my master is! I am afraid He will chastise me.

Ha, ha! What things are these, my lord Antonio? Will money buy 'em? Very like, one of them Is a plain fish, and, no doubt, marketable.

Mark but the badges of these men, my lords, Then say if they be true.

This mis-shapen knave, His mother was a witch, and one so strong That could control the moon, make flows and ebbs, And deal in her command without her power.

These three have robb'd me, and this demi-devil-- For he's a bastard one--had plotted with them To take my life.

Two of these fellows you Must know and own, this thing of darkness! Acknowledge mine.

Why, how now, Stephano! O, touch me not, I am not Stephano, but a cramp.

You'ld be king o' the isle, sirrah? I should have been a sore one then.

Pointing to Caliban He is as disproportion'd in his manners As in his shape.

Go, sirrah, to my cell, Take with you your companions, as you look To have my pardon, trim it handsomely.

Ay, that I will, and I'll be wise hereafter And seek for grace.

What a thrice-double ass Was I, to take this drunkard for a god And worship this dull fool! Go to, away! Hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.

I long To hear the story of your life, which must Take the ear strangely.

I'll deliver all, And promise you calm seas, auspicious gales And sail so expeditious that shall catch Your royal fleet far off.

Aside to ARIEL My Ariel, chick, That is thy charge: then to the elements Be free, and fare thou well! Please you, draw near.

SPOKEN BY PROSPERO Now my charms are all o'erthrown, And what strength I have's mine own, Which is most faint: now, 'tis true, I must be here confined by you, Or sent to Naples.

Now I want Spirits to enforce, art to enchant, And my ending is despair, Unless I be relieved by prayer, Which pierces so that it assaults Mercy itself and frees all faults.

As you from crimes would pardon'd be, Let your indulgence set me free.

I have not seen you long: how goes the world? It wears, sir, as it grows.

Ay, that's well known: But what particular rarity? what strange, Which manifold record not matches? See, Magic of bounty! all these spirits thy power Hath conjured to attend.

I know the merchant. I know them both, th' other's a jeweller.

A most incomparable man, breathed, as it were, To an untirable and continuate goodness: He passes.

Looking at the jewel And rich: here is a water, look ye.

You are rapt, sir, in some work, some dedication To the great lord.

Our poesy is as a gum, which oozes From whence 'tis nourish'd: the fire i' the flint Shows not till it be struck, our gentle flame Provokes itself and like the current flies Each bound it chafes.

When comes your book forth? Upon the heels of my presentment, sir.

Admirable: how this grace Speaks his own standing! what a mental power This eye shoots forth! how big imagination Moves in this lip! to the dumbness of the gesture One might interpret.

Here is a touch, is't good? I will say of it, It tutors nature: artificial strife Lives in these touches, livelier than life.

How this lord is follow'd! The senators of Athens: happy man! Look, more! You see this confluence, this great flood of visitors.

'Tis common: A thousand moral paintings I can show That shall demonstrate these quick blows of Fortune's More pregnantly than words.

Yet you do well To show Lord Timon that mean eyes have seen The foot above the head.

Noble Ventidius! Well, I am not of that feather to shake off My friend when he must need me.

I do know him A gentleman that well deserves a help: Which he shall have: I'll pay the debt, and free him.

Commend me to him: I will send his ransom, And being enfranchised, bid him come to me.

'Tis not enough to help the feeble up, But to support him after.

Fare you well. All happiness to your honour! Lord Timon, hear me speak.

I have so: what of him? Most noble Timon, call the man before thee.

Attends he here, or no? Lucilius! Here, at your lordship's service.

This fellow here, Lord Timon, this thy creature, By night frequents my house.

I am a man That from my first have been inclined to thrift, And my estate deserves an heir more raised Than one which holds a trencher.

This man of thine Attempts her love: I prithee, noble lord, Join with me to forbid him her resort, Myself have spoke in vain.

Therefore he will be, Timon: His honesty rewards him in itself, It must not bear my daughter.

Does she love him? She is young and apt: Our own precedent passions do instruct us What levity's in youth.

If in her marriage my consent be missing, I call the gods to witness, I will choose Mine heir from forth the beggars of the world, And dispossess her all.

How shall she be endow'd, if she be mated with an equal husband? Three talents on the present, in future, all.

This gentleman of mine hath served me long: To build his fortune I will strain a little, For 'tis a bond in men.

Give him thy daughter: What you bestow, in him I'll counterpoise, And make him weigh with her.

Most noble lord, Pawn me to this your honour, she is his.

What have you there, my friend? A piece of painting, which I do beseech Your lordship to accept.

The painting is almost the natural man, or since dishonour traffics with man's nature, He is but outside: these pencill'd figures are Even such as they give out.

I like your work, And you shall find I like it: wait attendance Till you hear further from me.

The gods preserve ye! Well fare you, gentleman: give me your hand, We must needs dine together.

What, my lord! dispraise? A more satiety of commendations.

If I should pay you for't as 'tis extoll'd, It would unclew me quite.

No, my good lord, he speaks the common tongue, Which all men speak with him.

Look, who comes here: will you be chid? Jeweller: We'll bear, with your lordship.

Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus! Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow, When thou art Timon's dog, and these knaves honest.

Why dost thou call them knaves? thou know'st them not.

Jeweller: You know me, Apemantus? Thou know'st I do: I call'd thee by thy name.

Whither art going? To knock out an honest Athenian's brains.

How likest thou this picture, Apemantus? The best, for the innocence.

Wrought he not well that painted it? He wrought better that made the painter, and yet he's but a filthy piece of work.

Thy mother's of my generation: what's she, if I be a dog? Wilt dine with me, Apemantus? No, I eat not lords.

How dost thou like this jewel, Apemantus? Not so well as plain-dealing, which will not cost a man a doit.

What dost thou think 'tis worth? Not worth my thinking.

Art not a poet? Then thou liest: look in thy last work, where thou hast feigned him a worthy fellow.

Yes, he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for thy labour: he that loves to be flattered is worthy o' the flatterer.

Heavens, that I were a lord! What wouldst do then, Apemantus? E'en as Apemantus does now, hate a lord with my heart.

What, thyself? That I had no angry wit to be a lord.

Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not! If traffic do it, the gods do it.

Traffic's thy god, and thy god confound thee! Trumpet sounds.

Enter a Messenger What trumpet's that? 'Tis Alcibiades, and some twenty horse, All of companionship.

You must needs dine with me: go not you hence Till I have thank'd you: when dinner's done, Show me this piece.

Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feed Most hungerly on your sight.

Right welcome, sir! Ere we depart, we'll share a bounteous time In different pleasures.

Pray you, let us in. What time o' day is't, Apemantus? Time to be honest.

Thou art going to Lord Timon's feast? Ay, to see meat fill knaves and wine heat fools.

Why, Apemantus? Shouldst have kept one to thyself, for I mean to give thee none.

Hang thyself! No, I will do nothing at thy bidding: make thy requests to thy friend.

Away, unpeaceable dog, or I'll spurn thee hence! I will fly, like a dog, the heels o' the ass.

Come, shall we in, And taste Lord Timon's bounty? he outgoes The very heart of kindness.

He pours it out, Plutus, the god of gold, Is but his steward: no meed, but he repays Sevenfold above itself, no gift to him, But breeds the giver a return exceeding All use of quittance.

The noblest mind he carries That ever govern'd man.

Long may he live in fortunes! Shall we in? I'll keep you company.

He is gone happy, and has left me rich: Then, as in grateful virtue I am bound To your free heart, I do return those talents, Doubled with thanks and service, from whose help I derived liberty.

Pray, sit, more welcome are ye to my fortunes Than my fortunes to me.

Ho, ho, confess'd it! hang'd it, have you not? O, Apemantus, you are welcome.

You shall not make me welcome: I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.

Fie, thou'rt a churl, ye've got a humour there Does not become a man: 'tis much to blame.

They say, my lords, 'ira furor brevis est,' but yond man is ever angry.

Go, let him have a table by himself, for he does neither affect company, nor is he fit for't, indeed.

Let me stay at thine apperil, Timon: I come to observe, I give thee warning on't.

I take no heed of thee, thou'rt an Athenian, therefore welcome: I myself would have no power, prithee, let my meat make thee silent.

I scorn thy meat, 'twould choke me, for I should ne'er flatter thee.

O you gods, what a number of men eat Timon, and he sees 'em not! It grieves me to see so many dip their meat in one man's blood, and all the madness is, he cheers them up too.

I wonder men dare trust themselves with men: Methinks they should invite them without knives, Good for their meat, and safer for their lives.

There's much example for't, the fellow that sits next him now, parts bread with him, pledges the breath of him in a divided draught, is the readiest man to kill him: 't has been proved.

If I were a huge man, I should fear to drink at meals, Lest they should spy my windpipe's dangerous notes: Great men should drink with harness on their throats.

Flow this way! A brave fellow! he keeps his tides well.

Those healths will make thee and thy state look ill, Timon.

Here's that which is too weak to be a sinner, honest water, which ne'er left man i' the mire: This and my food are equals, there's no odds: Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.

Eats and drinks Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus! Captain Alcibiades, your heart's in the field now.

You had rather be at a breakfast of enemies than a dinner of friends.

So the were bleeding-new, my lord, there's no meat like 'em: I could wish my best friend at such a feast.

Why, I have often wished myself poorer, that I might come nearer to you.

Joy had the like conception in our eyes And at that instant like a babe sprung up.

Tucket, within What means that trump? How now? Please you, my lord, there are certain ladies most desirous of admittance.

Ladies! what are their wills? There comes with them a forerunner, my lord, which bears that office, to signify their pleasures.

They're welcome all, let 'em have kind admittance: Music, make their welcome! You see, my lord, how ample you're beloved.

Re-enter Cupid with a mask of Ladies  as Amazons, with lutes in their hands, dancing and playing Hoy-day, what a sweep of vanity comes this way! They dance! they are mad women.

We make ourselves fools, to disport ourselves, And spend our flatteries, to drink those men Upon whose age we void it up again, With poisonous spite and envy.

'Faith, for the worst is filthy, and would not hold taking, I doubt me.

Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you: Please you to dispose yourselves.

More jewels yet! There is no crossing him in 's humour, Else I should tell him,--well, i' faith I should, When all's spent, he 'ld be cross'd then, an he could.

'Tis pity bounty had not eyes behind, That man might ne'er be wretched for his mind.

I am so far already in your gifts,-- So are we all.

My lord, there are certain nobles of the senate Newly alighted, and come to visit you.

I beseech your honour, Vouchsafe me a word, it does concern you near.

I shall accept them fairly, let the presents Be worthily entertain'd.

How now! what news? Please you, my lord, that honourable gentleman, Lord Lucullus, entreats your company to-morrow to hunt with him, and has sent your honour two brace of greyhounds.

I'll hunt with him, and let them be received, Not without fair reward.

Well, would I were gently put out of office Before I were forced out! Happier is he that has no friend to feed Than such that do e'en enemies exceed.

You do yourselves Much wrong, you bate too much of your own merits: Here, my lord, a trifle of our love.

O, he's the very soul of bounty! And now I remember, my lord, you gave Good words the other day of a bay courser I rode on: it is yours, because you liked it.

You may take my word, my lord, I know, no man Can justly praise but what he does affect: I weigh my friend's affection with mine own, I'll tell you true.

I take all and your several visitations So kind to heart, 'tis not enough to give, Methinks, I could deal kingdoms to my friends, And ne'er be weary.

Alcibiades, Thou art a soldier, therefore seldom rich, It comes in charity to thee: for all thy living Is 'mongst the dead, and all the lands thou hast Lie in a pitch'd field.

Lights, more lights! The best of happiness, Honour and fortunes, keep with you, Lord Timon! Ready for his friends.

What a coil's here! Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums! I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums That are given for 'em.

Friendship's full of dregs: Methinks, false hearts should never have sound legs, Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on court'sies.

Now, Apemantus, if thou wert not sullen, I would be good to thee.

No, I'll nothing: for if I should be bribed too, there would be none left to rail upon thee, and then thou wouldst sin the faster.

Thou givest so long, Timon, I fear me thou wilt give away thyself in paper shortly: what need these feasts, pomps and Nay, an you begin to rail on society once, I am sworn not to give regard to you.

Thou wilt not hear me now, thou shalt not then: I'll lock thy heaven from thee.

O, that men's ears should be To counsel deaf, but not to flattery! And late, five thousand: to Varro and to Isidore He owes nine thousand, besides my former sum, Which makes it five and twenty.

Still in motion Of raging waste? It cannot hold, it will not.

If I want gold, steal but a beggar's dog, And give it Timon, why, the dog coins gold.

If I would sell my horse, and buy twenty more Better than he, why, give my horse to Timon, Ask nothing, give it him, it foals me, straight, And able horses.

No porter at his gate, But rather one that smiles and still invites All that pass by.

It cannot hold: no reason Can found his state in safety.

Get you gone: Put on a most importunate aspect, A visage of demand, for, I do fear, When every feather sticks in his own wing, Lord Timon will be left a naked gull, Which flashes now a phoenix.

'I go, sir!'--Take the bonds along with you, And have the dates in contempt.

What shall be done? he will not hear, till feel: I must be round with him, now he comes from hunting.

Fie, fie, fie, fie! Good even, Varro: what, You come for money? Varro's Servant	Is't not your business too? It is: and yours too, Isidore? Isidore's Servant	It is so.

Would we were all discharged! Varro's Servant	I fear it.

So soon as dinner's done, we'll forth again, My Alcibiades.

With me? what is your will? My lord, here is a note of certain dues.

Mine honest friend, I prithee, but repair to me next morning.

Nay, good my lord,-- Contain thyself, good friend.

Varro's Servant	One Varro's servant, my good lord,-- Isidore's Servant	From Isidore, He humbly prays your speedy payment.

If you did know, my lord, my master's wants-- Varro's Servant	'Twas due on forfeiture, my lord, six weeks And past.

Isidore's Servant	         Your steward puts me off, my lord, And I am sent expressly to your lordship.

I do beseech you, good my lords, keep on, I'll wait upon you instantly.

Stay, stay, here comes the fool with Apemantus: let's ha' some sport with 'em.

Isidore's Servant	A plague upon him, dog! Varro's Servant	How dost, fool? Dost dialogue with thy shadow? Varro's Servant	I speak not to thee.

Isidore's Servant	There's the fool hangs on your back already.

Poor rogues, and usurers' men! bawds between gold and want! What are we, Apemantus? That you ask me what you are, and do not know yourselves.

Speak to 'em, fool. How do you, gentlemen? Gramercies, good fool: how does your mistress? She's e'en setting on water to scald such chickens as you are.

Would we could see you at Corinth! Good! gramercy.

in this wise company? How dost thou, Apemantus? Would I had a rod in my mouth, that I might answer thee profitably.

Prithee, Apemantus, read me the superscription of these letters: I know not which is which.

Canst not read? There will little learning die then, that day thou art hanged.

Go, thou wast born a bastard, and thou't die a bawd.

Thou wast whelped a dog, and thou shalt famish a dog's death.

Answer not, I am gone. E'en so thou outrunnest grace.

You three serve three usurers? Ay, would they served us! So would I,--as good a trick as ever hangman served thief.

I think no usurer but has a fool to his servant: my mistress is one, and I am her fool.

When men come to borrow of your masters, they approach sadly, and go away merry, but they enter my mistress' house merrily, and go away sadly: the reason of this? Varro's Servant	I could render one.

Do it then, that we may account thee a whoremaster and a knave, which not-withstanding, thou shalt be no less esteemed.

Varro's Servant	What is a whoremaster, fool? A fool in good clothes, and something like thee.

Nor thou altogether a wise man: as much foolery as I have, so much wit thou lackest.

Re-enter TIMON and FLAVIUS Come with me, fool, come.

I do not always follow lover, elder brother and woman, sometime the philosopher.

When my indispos ition put you back: And that unaptness made your minister, Thus to excuse yourself.

O my good lord, At many times I brought in my accounts, Laid them before you, you would throw them off, And say, you found them in mine honesty.

My loved lord, Though you hear now, too late--yet now's a time-- The greatest of your having lacks a half To pay your present debts.

O my good lord, the world is but a word: Were it all yours to give it in a breath, How quickly were it gone! You tell me true.

If you suspect my husbandry or falsehood, Call me before the exactest auditors And set me on the proof.

Come, sermon me no further: No villanous bounty yet hath pass'd my heart, Unwisely, not ignobly, have I given.

Go you, sir, to the senators-- Of whom, even to the state's best health, I have Deserved this hearing--bid 'em send o' the instant A thousand talents to me.

I have been bold-- For that I knew it the most general way-- To them to use your signet and your name, But they do shake their heads, and I am here No richer in return.

You gods, reward them! Prithee, man, look cheerly.

To FLAVIUS Prithee, be not sad, Thou art true and honest, ingeniously I speak.

To FLAVIUS That had, give't these fellows To whom 'tis instant due.

Ne'er speak, or think, That Timon's fortunes 'mong his friends can sink.

I would I could not think it: that thought is bounty's foe, Being free itself, it thinks all others so.

Enter a Servant to him I have told my lord of you, he is coming down to you.

Why, this hits right, I dreamt of a silver basin and ewer to-night.

Flaminius, honest Flaminius, you are very respectively welcome, sir.

And how does that honourable, complete, free-hearted gentleman of Athens, thy very bountiful good lord and master? His health is well sir.

La, la, la, la! 'nothing doubting,' says he? Alas, good lord! a noble gentleman 'tis, if he would not keep so good a house.

Many a time and often I ha' dined with him, and told him on't, and come again to supper to him, of purpose to have him spend less, and yet he would embrace no counsel, take no warning by my coming.

Every man has his fault, and honesty is his: I ha' told him on't, but I could ne'er get him from't.

Re-enter Servant, with wine Please your lordship, here is the wine.

Here's to thee. Your lordship speaks your pleasure.

I have observed thee always for a towardly prompt spirit--give thee thy due--and one that knows what belongs to reason, and canst use the time well, if the time use thee well: good parts in thee.

Thy lord's a bountiful gentleman: but thou art wise, and thou knowest well enough, although thou comest to me, that this is no time to lend money, especially upon bare friendship, without security.

Here's three solidares for thee: good boy, wink at me, and say thou sawest me not.

We know him for no less, though we are but strangers to him.

But I can tell you one thing, my lord, and which I hear from common rumours: now Lord Timon's happy hours are done and past, and his estate shrinks from him.

Fie, no, do not believe it, he cannot want for money.

What a strange case was that! now, before the gods, I am ashamed on't.

Denied that honourable man! there was very little honour showed in't.

See, by good hap, yonder's my lord, I have sweat to see his honour.

My honoured lord,-- To LUCIUS Servilius! you are kindly met, sir.

Fare thee well: commend me to thy honourable virtuous lord, my very exquisite friend.

I know his lordship is but merry with me, He cannot want fifty five hundred talents.

If his occasion were not virtuous, I should not urge it half so faithfully.

Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius? Upon my soul,'tis true, sir.

Good Servilius, will you befriend me so far, as to use mine own words to him? Yes, sir, I shall.

True as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed, And he that's once denied will hardly speed.

Why, this is the world's soul, and just of the same piece Is every flatterer's spirit.

My lord, They have all been touch'd and found base metal, for They have au denied him.

I'ld rather than the worth of thrice the sum, Had sent to me first, but for my mind's sake, I'd such a courage to do him good.

But now return, And with their faint reply this answer join, Who bates mine honour shall not know my coin.

The devil knew not what he did when he made man politic, he crossed himself by 't: and I cannot think but, in the end, the villainies of man will set him clear.

How fairly this lord strives to appear foul! takes virtuous copies to be wicked, like those that under hot ardent zeal would set whole realms on fire: Of such a nature is his politic love.

And this is all a liberal course allows, Who cannot keep his wealth must keep his house.

What, do we meet together? Lucilius' Servant	Ay, and I think One business does command us all, for mine Is money.

Lucilius' Servant	And Sir Philotus too! Good day at once.

Lucilius' Servant	                  Welcome, good brother.

Lucilius' Servant	So much? Is not my lord seen yet? Lucilius' Servant	Not yet.

Lucilius' Servant	Ay, but the days are wax'd shorter with him: You must consider that a prodigal course Is like the sun's, but not, like his, recoverable.

I fear 'tis deepest winter in Lord Timon's purse, That is one may reach deep enough, and yet Find little.

And he wears jewels now of Timon's gift, For which I wait for money.

Lucilius' Servant	Mark, how strange it shows, Timon in this should pay more than he owes: And e'en as if your lord should wear rich jewels, And send for money for 'em.

I'm weary of this charge, the gods can witness: I know my lord hath spent of Timon's wealth, And now ingratitude makes it worse than stealth.

Yes, mine's three thousand crowns: what's yours? Lucilius' Servant	Five thousand mine.

'Tis much deep: and it should seem by the sun, Your master's confidence was above mine, Else, surely, his had equall'd.

Lucilius' Servant	Flaminius! Sir, a word: pray, is my lord ready to come forth? No, indeed, he is not.

I need not tell him that, he knows you are too diligent.

Lucilius' Servant	Ha! is not that his steward muffled so? He goes away in a cloud: call him, call him.

Do you hear, sir? By your leave, sir,-- What do ye ask of me, my friend? We wait for certain money here, sir.

If money were as certain as your waiting, 'Twere sure enough.

Why then preferr'd you not your sums and bills, When your false masters eat of my lord's meat? Then they could smile and fawn upon his debts And take down the interest into their gluttonous maws.

You do yourselves but wrong to stir me up, Let me pass quietly: Believe 't, my lord and I have made an end, I have no more to reckon, he to spend.

Lucilius' Servant	Ay, but this answer will not serve.

If 'twill not serve,'tis not so base as you, For you serve knaves.

How! what does his cashiered worship mutter? No matter what, he's poor, and that's revenge enough.

Who can speak broader than he that has no house to put his head in? such may rail against great buildings.

O, here's Servilius, now we shall know some answer.

Lucilius' Servant: Many do keep their chambers are not sick: And, if it be so far beyond his health, Methinks he should the sooner pay his debts, And make a clear way to the gods.

Lucilius' Servant	Alas, my lord,- Cut my heart in sums.

Re-enter TIMON and FLAVIUS They have e'en put my breath from me, the slaves.

Creditors? devils! My dear lord,-- What if it should be so? My lord,-- I'll have it so.

So fitly? Go, bid all my friends again, Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius: All, sirrah, all: I'll once more feast the rascals.

O my lord, You only speak from your distracted soul, There is not so much left, to furnish out A moderate table.

Be't not in thy care, go, I charge thee, invite them all: let in the tide Of knaves once more, my cook and I'll provide.

My lord, you have my voice to it, the fault's Bloody, 'tis necessary he should die: Nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy.

Honour, health, and compassion to the senate! Now, captain? I am an humble suitor to your virtues, For pity is the virtue of the law, And none but tyrants use it cruelly.

It pleases time and fortune to lie heavy Upon a friend of mine, who, in hot blood, Hath stepp'd into the law, which is past depth To those that, without heed, do plunge into 't.

If wrongs be evils and enforce us kill, What folly 'tis to hazard life for ill! My lord,-- You cannot make gross sins look clear: To revenge is no valour, but to bear.

My lords, then, under favour, pardon me, If I speak like a captain.

O my lords, As you are great, be pitifully good: Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood? To kill, I grant, is sin's extremest gust, But, in defence, by mercy, 'tis most just.

To be in anger is impiety, But who is man that is not angry? Weigh but the crime with this.

In vain! his service done At Lacedaemon and Byzantium Were a sufficient briber for his life.

If by this crime he owes the law his life, Why, let the war receive 't in valiant gore For law is strict, and war is nothing more.

We are for law: he dies, urge it no more, On height of our displeasure: friend or brother, He forfeits his own blood that spills another.

I cannot think but your age has forgot me, It could not else be, I should prove so base, To sue, and be denied such common grace: My wounds ache at you.

Do you dare our anger? 'Tis in few words, but spacious in effect, We banish thee for ever.

Banish me! Banish your dotage, banish usury, That makes the senate ugly.

If, after two days' shine, Athens contain thee, Attend our weightier judgment.

And, not to swell our spirit, He shall be executed presently.

I'll cheer up My discontented troops, and lay for hearts.

'Tis honour with most lands to be at odds, Soldiers should brook as little wrongs as gods.

Tables set out: Servants attending.  Enter divers Lords, Senators and others, at several doors The good time of day to you, sir.

I think this honourable lord did but try us this other day.

Upon that were my thoughts tiring, when we encountered: I hope it is not so low with him as he made it seem in the trial of his several friends.

It should not be, by the persuasion of his new feasting.

I should think so: he hath sent me an earnest inviting, which many my near occasions did urge me to put off, but he hath conjured me beyond them, and I must needs appear.

In like manner was I in debt to my importunate business, but he would not hear my excuse.

I am sorry, when he sent to borrow of me, that my provision was out.

I am sick of that grief too, as I understand how all things go.

A thousand pieces! What of you? He sent to me, sir,--Here he comes.

With all my heart, gentlemen both, and how fare you? Ever at the best, hearing well of your lordship.

The swallow follows not summer more willing than we your lordship.

Gentlemen, our dinner will not recompense this long stay: feast your ears with the music awhile, if they will fare so harshly o' the trumpet's sound, we shall to 't presently.

I hope it remains not unkindly with your lordship that I returned you an empty messenger.

My noble lord,-- Ah, my good friend, what cheer? My most honourable lord, I am e'en sick of shame, that, when your lordship this other day sent to me, I was so unfortunate a beggar.

If you had sent but two hours before,-- Let it not cumber your better remembrance.

The banquet brought in Come, bring in all together.

Doubt not that, if money and the season can yield How do you? What's the news? Alcibiades is banished: hear you of it? Alcibiades banished! 'Tis so, be sure of it.

How! how! I pray you, upon what? My worthy friends, will you draw near? I'll tell you more anon.

Here's a noble feast toward. This is the old man still.

Will 't hold? will 't hold? It does: but time will--and so-- I do conceive.

Each man to his stool, with that spur as he would to the lip of his mistress: your diet shall be in all places alike.

Make not a city feast of it, to let the meat cool ere we can agree upon the first place: sit, sit.

The gods require our thanks. You great benefactors, sprinkle our society with thankfulness.

For your own gifts, make yourselves praised: but reserve still to give, lest your deities be despised.

Lend to each man enough, that one need not lend to another, for, were your godheads to borrow of men, men would forsake the gods.

Make the meat be beloved more than the man that gives it.

Let no assembly of twenty be without a score of villains: if there sit twelve women at the table, let a dozen of them be--as they are.

The rest of your fees, O gods--the senators of Athens, together with the common lag of people--what is amiss in them, you gods, make suitable for destruction.

For these my present friends, as they are to me nothing, so in nothing bless them, and to nothing are they welcome.

The dishes are uncovered and seen to be full of warm water What does his lordship mean? I know not.

May you a better feast never behold, You knot of mouth-friends I smoke and lukewarm water Is your perfection.

This is Timon's last, Who, stuck and spangled with your flatteries, Washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces Your reeking villany.

Throws the dishes at them, and drives them out What, all in motion? Henceforth be no feast, Whereat a villain's not a welcome guest.

He's but a mad lord, and nought but humour sways him.

He gave me a jewel th' other day, and now he has beat it out of my hat: did you see my jewel? Did you see my cap? Here 'tis.

The gods confound--hear me, you good gods all-- The Athenians both within and out that wall! And grant, as Timon grows, his hate may grow To the whole race of mankind, high and low! Amen.

Hear you, master steward, where's our master? Are we undone? cast off? nothing remaining? Alack, my fellows, what should I say to you? Let me be recorded by the righteous gods, I am as poor as you.

More of our fellows. All broken implements of a ruin'd house.

Good fellows all, The latest of my wealth I'll share amongst you.

Wherever we shall meet, for Timon's sake, Let's yet be fellows, let's shake our heads, and say, As 'twere a knell unto our master's fortunes, 'We have seen better days.

Not one word more: Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.

My dearest lord, bless'd, to be most accursed, Rich, only to be wretched, thy great fortunes Are made thy chief afflictions.

Alas, kind lord! He's flung in rage from this ingrateful seat Of monstrous friends, nor has he with him to Supply his life, or that which can command it.

I'll follow and inquire him out: I'll ever serve his mind with my best will, Whilst I have gold, I'll be his steward still.

Raise me this beggar, and deny 't that lord, The senator shall bear contempt hereditary, The beggar native honour.

It is the pasture lards the rother's sides, The want that makes him lean.

Come, damned earth, Thou common whore of mankind, that put'st odds Among the route of nations, I will make thee Do thy right nature.

March afar off Ha! a drum ? Thou'rt quick, But yet I'll bury thee: thou'lt go, strong thief, When gouty keepers of thee cannot stand.

The canker gnaw thy heart, For showing me again the eyes of man! What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee, That art thyself a man? I am Misanthropos, and hate mankind.

For thy part, I do wish thou wert a dog, That I might love thee something.

I know thee well, But in thy fortunes am unlearn'd and strange.

I know thee too, and more than that I know thee, I not desire to know.

Thy lips rot off! I will not kiss thee, then the rot returns To thine own lips again.

How came the noble Timon to this change? As the moon does, by wanting light to give: But then renew I could not, like the moon, There were no suns to borrow of.

Noble Timon, What friendship may I do thee? None, but to Maintain my opinion.

Is this the Athenian minion, whom the world Voiced so regardfully? Art thou Timandra? Be a whore still: they love thee not that use thee, Give them diseases, leaving with thee their lust.

Make use of thy salt hours: season the slaves For tubs and baths, bring down rose-cheeked youth To the tub-fast and the diet.

Hang thee, monster! Pardon him, sweet Timandra, for his wits Are drown'd and lost in his calamities.

How dost thou pity him whom thou dost trouble? I had rather be alone.

When I have laid proud Athens on a heap,-- Warr'st thou 'gainst Athens? Ay, Timon, and have cause.

The gods confound them all in thy conquest, And thee after, when thou hast conquer'd! Why me, Timon? That, by killing of villains, Thou wast born to conquer my country.

There's gold to pay soldiers: Make large confusion, and, thy fury spent, Confounded be thyself! Speak not, be gone.

Hast thou gold yet? I'll take the gold thou givest me, Not all thy counsel.

Dost thou, or dost thou not, heaven's curse upon thee! Give us some gold, good Timon: hast thou more? Enough to make a whore forswear her trade, And to make whores, a bawd.

Consumptions sow In hollow bones of man, strike their sharp shins, And mar men's spurring.

There's more gold: Do you damn others, and let this damn you, And ditches grave you all! More counsel with more money, bounteous Timon.

More whore, more mischief first, I have given you earnest.

Strike up the drum towards Athens! Farewell, Timon: If I thrive well, I'll visit thee again.

'Tis, then, because thou dost not keep a dog, Whom I would imitate: consumption catch thee! This is in thee a nature but infected, A poor unmanly melancholy sprung From change of fortune.

Why this spade? this place? This slave-like habit? and these looks of care? Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft, Hug their diseased perfumes, and have forgot That ever Timon was.

Shame not these woods, By putting on the cunning of a carper.

Do not assume my likeness. Were I like thee, I'ld throw away myself.

Thou hast cast away thyself, being like thyself, A madman so long, now a fool.

Thou art a slave, whom Fortune's tender arm With favour never clasp'd, but bred a dog.

Hence, be gone! If thou hadst not been born the worst of men, Thou hadst been a knave and flatterer.

I, that I am one now: Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee, I'ld give thee leave to hang it.

Get thee gone. That the whole life of Athens were in this! Thus would I eat it.

Offering him a root First mend my company, take away thyself.

'Tis not well mended so, it is but botch'd, if not, I would it were.

What wouldst thou have to Athens? Thee thither in a whirlwind.

If thou wilt, Tell them there I have gold, look, so I have.

The best and truest, For here it sleeps, and does no hired harm.

Where liest o' nights, Timon? Under that's above me.

Where feed'st thou o' days, Apemantus? Where my stomach finds meat, or, rather, where I eat Would poison were obedient and knew my mind! Where wouldst thou send it? To sauce thy dishes.

An thou hadst hated meddlers sooner, thou shouldst have loved thyself better now.

What wouldst thou do with the world, Apemantus, if it lay in thy power? Give it the beasts, to be rid of the men.

Wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confusion of men, and remain a beast with the beasts? Ay, Timon.

When there is nothing living but thee, thou shalt be welcome.

I had rather be a beggar's dog than Apemantus. Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.

Would thou wert clean enough to spit upon! A plague on thee! thou art too bad to curse.

I would my tongue could rot them off! Away, thou issue of a mangy dog! Choler does kill me that thou art alive, I swound to see thee.

Would thou wouldst burst! Thou tedious rogue! I am sorry I shall lose A stone by thee.

Throws a stone at him Rogue, rogue, rogue! I am sick of this false world, and will love nought But even the mere necessities upon 't.

Then, Timon, presently prepare thy grave, Lie where the light foam the sea may beat Thy grave-stone daily: make thine epitaph, That death in me at others' lives may laugh.

I'll say thou'st gold: Thou wilt be throng'd to shortly.

Where should he have this gold? It is some poor fragment, some slender sort of his remainder: the mere want of gold, and the falling-from of his friends, drove him into this melancholy.

Let us make the assay upon him: if he care not for't, he will supply us easily, if he covetously reserve it, how shall's get it? True, for he bears it not about him, 'tis hid.

Want! why want? We cannot live on grass, on berries, water, As beasts and birds and fishes.

Nor on the beasts themselves, the birds, and fishes, You must eat men.

Yet thanks I must you con That you are thieves profess'd, that you work not In holier shapes: for there is boundless theft In limited professions.

Has almost charmed me from my profession, by persuading me to it.

'Tis in the malice of mankind that he thus advises us, not to have us thrive in our mystery.

I'll believe him as an enemy, and give over my trade.

Let us first see peace in Athens: there is no time so miserable but a man may be true.

My dearest master! Away! what art thou? Have you forgot me, sir? Why dost ask that? I have forgot all men, Then, if thou grant'st thou'rt a man, I have forgot thee.

Then I know thee not: I never had honest man about me, I, all I kept were knaves, to serve in meat to villains.

The gods are witness, Ne'er did poor steward wear a truer grief For his undone lord than mine eyes for you.

Then I love thee, Because thou art a woman, and disclaim'st Flinty mankind, whose eyes do never give But thorough lust and laughter.

Had I a steward So true, so just, and now so comfortable? It almost turns my dangerous nature mild.

Forgive my general and exceptless rashness, You perpetual-sober gods! I do proclaim One honest man--mistake me not--but one, No more, I pray,--and he's a steward.

How fain would I have hated all mankind! And thou redeem'st thyself: but all, save thee, I fell with curses.

Methinks thou art more honest now than wise, For, by oppressing and betraying me, Thou mightst have sooner got another service: For many so arrive at second masters, Upon their first lord's neck.

Look thee, 'tis so! Thou singly honest man, Here, take: the gods out of my misery Have sent thee treasure.

If thou hatest curses, Stay not, fly, whilst thou art blest and free: Ne'er see thou man, and let me ne'er see thee.

As I took note of the place, it cannot be far where he abides.

Then this breaking of his has been but a try for his friends.

Nothing else: you shall see him a palm in Athens again, and flourish with the highest.

What have you now to present unto him? Nothing at this time but my visitation: only I will promise him an excellent piece.

I must serve him so too, tell him of an intent that's coming toward him.

To promise is most courtly and fashionable: performance is a kind of will or testament which argues a great sickness in his judgment that makes it.

TIMON comes from his cave, behind man so bad as is thyself.

thine own work? wilt thou whip thine own faults in other men? Do so, I have gold for thee.

Nay, let's seek him: Then do we sin against our own estate, When we may profit meet, and come too late.

When the day serves, before black-corner'd night, Find what thou want'st by free and offer'd light.

Let it go naked, men may see't the better: You that are honest, by being what you are, Make them best seen and known.

He and myself Have travail'd in the great shower of your gifts, And sweetly felt it.

Most honest men! Why, how shall I requite you? Can you eat roots, and drink cold water? no.

Ye're honest men: ye've heard that I have gold, I am sure you have: speak truth, ye're honest men.

So it is said, my noble lord, but therefore Came not my friend nor I.

Good honest men! Thou draw'st a counterfeit Best in all Athens: thou'rt, indeed, the best, Thou counterfeit'st most lively.

And, for thy fiction, Why, thy verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth That thou art even natural in thine art.

But, for all this, my honest-natured friends, I must needs say you have a little fault: Marry, 'tis not monstrous in you, neither wish I You take much pains to mend.

There's never a one of you but trusts a knave, That mightily deceives you.

Do we, my lord? Ay, and you hear him cog, see him dissemble, Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him, Keep in your bosom: yet remain assured That he's a made-up villain.

You that way and you this, but two in company, Each man apart, all single and alone, Yet an arch-villain keeps him company.

If where thou art two villains shall not be, Come not near him.

If thou wouldst not reside But where one villain is, then him abandon.

Hence, pack! there's gold, you came for gold, ye slaves: To Painter You have work'd for me, there's payment for you: hence! To Poet You are an alchemist, make gold of that.

Bring us to his cave: It is our part and promise to the Athenians To speak with Timon.

At all times alike Men are not still the same: 'twas time and griefs That framed him thus: time, with his fairer hand, Offering the fortunes of his former days, The former man may make him.

Peace and content be here! Lord Timon! Timon! Look out, and speak to friends: the Athenians, By two of their most reverend senate, greet thee: Speak to them, noble Timon.

I thank them, and would send them back the plague, Could I but catch it for them.

O, forget What we are sorry for ourselves in thee.

The senators with one consent of love Entreat thee back to Athens, who have thought On special dignities, which vacant lie For thy best use and wearing.

You witch me in it, Surprise me to the very brink of tears: Lend me a fool's heart and a woman's eyes, And I'll beweep these comforts, worthy senators.

And shakes his threatening sword Against the walls of Athens.

Therefore, Timon,-- Well, sir, I will, therefore, I will, sir, thus: If Alcibiades kill my countrymen, Let Alcibiades know this of Timon, That Timon cares not.

So I leave you To the protection of the prosperous gods, As thieves to keepers.

Why, I was writing of my epitaph, it will be seen to-morrow: my long sickness Of health and living now begins to mend, And nothing brings me all things.

Go, live still, Be Alcibiades your plague, you his, And last so long enough! We speak in vain.

But yet I love my country, and am not One that rejoices in the common wreck, As common bruit doth put it.

Commend me to my loving countrymen,-- These words become your lips as they pass thorough them.

And enter in our ears like great triumphers In their applauding gates.

I pray you, do my greeting. Trouble him no further, thus you still shall find him.

Lips, let sour words go by and language end: What is amiss plague and infection mend! Graves only be men's works and death their gain! Sun, hide thy beams! Timon hath done his reign.

Retires to his cave His discontents are unremoveably Coupled to nature.

Our hope in him is dead: let us return, And strain what other means is left unto us In our dear peril.

Thou hast painfully discover'd: are his files As full as thy report? have spoke the least: Besides, his expedition promises Present approach.

The enemies' drum is heard, and fearful scouring Doth choke the air with dust: in, and prepare: Ours is the fall, I fear, our foes the snare.

Who's here? speak, ho! No answer! What is this? Timon is dead, who hath outstretch'd his span: Some beast rear'd this, there does not live a man.

Enter ALCIBIADES with his powers Sound to this coward and lascivious town Our terrible approach.

So did we woo Transformed Timon to our city's love By humble message and by promised means: We were not all unkind, nor all deserve The common stroke of war.

These walls of ours Were not erected by their hands from whom You have received your griefs, nor are they such That these great towers, trophies and schools should fall For private faults in them.

Nor are they living Who were the motives that you first went out, Shame that they wanted cunning, in excess Hath broke their hearts.

All have not offended, For those that were, it is not square to take On those that are, revenges: crimes, like lands, Are not inherited.

What thou wilt, Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile Than hew to't with thy sword.

Set but thy foot Against our rampired gates, and they shall ope, So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before, To say thou'lt enter friendly.

Dead Is noble Timon: of whose memory Hereafter more.

Bring me into your city, And I will use the olive with my sword, Make war breed peace, make peace stint war, make each Prescribe to other as each other's leech.

The Tomb of the ANDRONICI appearing, the Tribunes  and Senators aloft.

Let us entreat, by honour of his name, Whom worthily you would have now succeed.

Friends, that have been thus forward in my right, I thank you all and here dismiss you all, And to the love and favor of my country Commit myself, my person and the cause.

Rome, be as just and gracious unto me As I am confident and kind to thee.

SATURNINUS and BASSIANUS go up into the Capitol Romans, make way: the good Andronicus.

Titus, unkind and careless of thine own, Why suffer'st thou thy sons, unburied yet, To hover on the dreadful shore of Styx? Make way to lay them by their brethren.

I give him you, the noblest that survives, The eldest son of this distressed queen.

Away with him! and make a fire straight, And with our swords, upon a pile of wood, Let's hew his limbs till they be clean consumed.

O cruel, irreligious piety! Was ever Scythia half so barbarous? Oppose not Scythia to ambitious Rome.

Alarbus goes to rest, and we survive To tremble under Titus' threatening looks.

Remaineth nought, but to inter our brethren, And with loud 'larums welcome them to Rome.

Let it be so, and let Andronicus Make this his latest farewell to their souls.

Proud and ambitious tribune, canst thou tell? Patience, Prince Saturninus.

Romans, do me right: Patricians, draw your swords: and sheathe them not Till Saturninus be Rome's emperor.

Thanks, noble Titus, father of my life! How proud I am of thee and of thy gifts Rome shall record, and when I do forget The least of these unspeakable deserts, Romans, forget your fealty to me.

an emperor, To him that, for your honour and your state, Will use you nobly and your followers.

A goodly lady, trust me, of the hue That I would choose, were I to choose anew.

Clear up, fair queen, that cloudy countenance: Though chance of war hath wrought this change of cheer, Thou comest not to be made a scorn in Rome: Princely shall be thy usage every way.

Rest on my word, and let not discontent Daunt all your hopes: madam, he comforts you Can make you greater than the Queen of Goths.

Lavinia, you are not displeased with this? Not I, my lord, sith true nobility Warrants these words in princely courtesy.

Romans, let us go, Ransomless here we set our prisoners free: Proclaim our honours, lords, with trump and drum.

SATURNINUS courts TAMORA in dumb show Lord Titus, by your leave, this maid is mine.

Seizing LAVINIA How, sir! are you in earnest then, my lord? Ay, noble Titus, and resolved withal To do myself this reason and this right.

'Suum cuique' is our Roman justice: This prince in justice seizeth but his own.

Traitors, avaunt! Where is the emperor's guard? Treason, my lord! Lavinia is surprised! Surprised! by whom? By him that justly may Bear his betroth'd from all the world away.

Brothers, help to convey her hence away, And with my sword I'll keep this door safe.

Nor thou, nor he, are any sons of mine, My sons would never so dishonour me: Traitor, restore Lavinia to the emperor.

Dead, if you will, but not to be his wife, That is another's lawful promised love.

Was there none else in Rome to make a stale, But Saturnine? Full well, Andronicus, Agree these deeds with that proud brag of thine, That said'st I begg'd the empire at thy hands.

And here, in sight of heaven, to Rome I swear, If Saturnine advance the Queen of Goths, She will a handmaid be to his desires, A loving nurse, a mother to his youth.

Lords, accompany Your noble emperor and his lovely bride, Sent by the heavens for Prince Saturnine, Whose wisdom hath her fortune conquered: There shall we consummate our spousal rites.

My lord, this is impiety in you: My nephew Mutius' deeds do plead for him He must be buried with his brethren.

'And shall!' what villain was it that spake that word? He that would vouch it in any place but here.

What, would you bury him in my despite? No, noble Titus, but entreat of thee To pardon Mutius and to bury him.

Marcus, even thou hast struck upon my crest, And, with these boys, mine honour thou hast wounded: My foes I do repute you every one, So, trouble me no more, but get you gone.

MARCUS and the Sons of TITUS kneel Brother, for in that name doth nature plead,-- Father, and in that name doth nature speak,-- Speak thou no more, if all the rest will speed.

The dismall'st day is this that e'er I saw, To be dishonour'd by my sons in Rome! Well, bury him, and bury me the next.

MUTIUS is put into the tomb There lie thy bones, sweet Mutius, with thy friends, Till we with trophies do adorn thy tomb.

Traitor, if Rome have law or we have power, Thou and thy faction shall repent this rape.

Rape, call you it, my lord, to seize my own, My truth-betrothed love and now my wife? But let the laws of Rome determine all, Meanwhile I am possess'd of that is mine.

'Tis good, sir: you are very short with us, But, if we live, we'll be as sharp with you.

My lord, what I have done, as best I may, Answer I must and shall do with my life.

Prince Bassianus, leave to plead my deeds: 'Tis thou and those that have dishonour'd me.

Come, come, sweet emperor, come, Andronicus, Take up this good old man, and cheer the heart That dies in tempest of thy angry frown.

I thank your majesty, and her, my lord: These words, these looks, infuse new life in me.

Titus, I am incorporate in Rome, A Roman now adopted happily, And must advise the emperor for his good.

This day all quarrels die, Andronicus, And let it be mine honour, good my lord, That I have reconciled your friends and you.

For you, Prince Bassianus, I have pass'd My word and promise to the emperor, That you will be more mild and tractable.

And fear not lords, and you, Lavinia, By my advice, all humbled on your knees, You shall ask pardon of his majesty.

We do, and vow to heaven and to his highness, That what we did was mildly as we might, Tendering our sister's honour and our own.

Nay, nay, sweet emperor, we must all be friends: The tribune and his nephews kneel for grace, I will not be denied: sweet heart, look back.

Marcus, for thy sake and thy brother's here, And at my lovely Tamora's entreats, I do remit these young men's heinous faults: Stand up.

Lavinia, though you left me like a churl, I found a friend, and sure as death I swore I would not part a bachelor from the priest.

Come, if the emperor's court can feast two brides, You are my guest, Lavinia, and your friends.

To-morrow, an it please your majesty To hunt the panther and the hart with me, With horn and hound we'll give your grace bonjour.

Exeunt Now climbeth Tamora Olympus' top, Safe out of fortune's shot, and sits aloft, Secure of thunder's crack or lightning flash, Advanced above pale envy's threatening reach.

Away with slavish weeds and servile thoughts! I will be bright, and shine in pearl and gold, To wait upon this new-made empress.

To wait, said I? to wanton with this queen, This goddess, this Semiramis, this nymph, This siren, that will charm Rome's Saturnine, And see his shipwreck and his commonweal's.

Holloa! what storm is this? Chiron, thy years want wit, thy wit wants edge, And manners, to intrude where I am graced, And may, for aught thou know'st, affected be.

Demetrius, thou dost over-ween in all, And so in this, to bear me down with braves.

Meanwhile, sir, with the little skill I have, Full well shalt thou perceive how much I dare.

Not I, till I have sheathed My rapier in his bosom and withal Thrust these reproachful speeches down his throat That he hath breathed in my dishonour here.

Foul-spoken coward, that thunder'st with thy tongue, And with thy weapon nothing darest perform! Away, I say! Now, by the gods that warlike Goths adore, This petty brabble will undo us all.

I care not, I, knew she and all the world: I love Lavinia more than all the world.

Youngling, learn thou to make some meaner choice: Lavinia is thine elder brother's hope.

Why, are ye mad? or know ye not, in Rome How furious and impatient they be, And cannot brook competitors in love? I tell you, lords, you do but plot your deaths By this device.

Aaron, a thousand deaths Would I propose to achieve her whom I love.

To achieve her! how? Why makest thou it so strange? She is a woman, therefore may be woo'd, She is a woman, therefore may be won, She is Lavinia, therefore must be loved.

What, man! more water glideth by the mill Than wots the miller of, and easy it is Of a cut loaf to steal a shive, we know: Though Bassianus be the emperor's brother.

Would you had hit it too! Then should not we be tired with this ado.

Why, hark ye, hark ye! and are you such fools To square for this? would it offend you, then That both should speed? Faith, not me.

Take this of me: Lucrece was not more chaste Than this Lavinia, Bassianus' love.

A speedier course than lingering languishment Must we pursue, and I have found the path.

Thy counsel, lad, smells of no cowardice, Sit fas aut nefas, till I find the stream To cool this heat, a charm to calm these fits.

Sons, let it be your charge, as it is ours, To attend the emperor's person carefully: I have been troubled in my sleep this night, But dawning day new comfort hath inspired.

Enter  SATURNINUS, TAMORA, BASSIANUS, LAVINIA, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON, and Attendants Many good morrows to your majesty, Madam, to you as many and as good: I promised your grace a hunter's peal.

And you have rung it lustily, my lord, Somewhat too early for new-married ladies.

Lavinia, how say you? I say, no, I have been broad awake two hours and more.

Come on, then, horse and chariots let us have, And to our sport.

To TAMORA Madam, now shall ye see Our Roman hunting.

I have dogs, my lord, Will rouse the proudest panther in the chase, And climb the highest promontory top.

And I have horse will follow where the game Makes way, and run like swallows o'er the plain.

Chiron, we hunt not, we, with horse nor hound, But hope to pluck a dainty doe to ground.

He that had wit would think that I had none, To bury so much gold under a tree, And never after to inherit it.

Seest thou this letter? take it up, I pray thee, And give the king this fatal plotted scroll.

Now question me no more, we are espied, Here comes a parcel of our hopeful booty, Which dreads not yet their lives' destruction.

Ah, my sweet Moor, sweeter to me than life! No more, great empress, Bassianus comes: Be cross with him, and I'll go fetch thy sons To back thy quarrels, whatsoe'er they be.

Believe me, queen, your swarth Cimmerian Doth make your honour of his body's hue, Spotted, detested, and abominable.

Why are you sequester'd from all your train, Dismounted from your snow-white goodly steed.

I pray you, let us hence, And let her joy her raven-colour'd love, This valley fits the purpose passing well.

Revenge it, as you love your mother's life, Or be ye not henceforth call'd my children.

Stabs BASSIANUS And this for me, struck home to show my strength.

Drag hence her husband to some secret hole, And make his dead trunk pillow to our lust.

But when ye have the honey ye desire, Let not this wasp outlive, us both to sting.

Come, mistress, now perforce we will enjoy That nice-preserved honesty of yours.

O Tamora! thou bear'st a woman's face,-- I will not hear her speak, away with her! Sweet lords, entreat her hear me but a word.

Listen, fair madam: let it be your glory To see her tears, but be your heart to them As unrelenting flint to drops of rain.

When did the tiger's young ones teach the dam? O, do not learn her wrath, she taught it thee, The milk thou suck'dst from her did turn to marble, Even at thy teat thou hadst thy tyranny.

Yet every mother breeds not sons alike: To CHIRON Do thou entreat her show a woman pity.

Hadst thou in person ne'er offended me, Even for his sake am I pitiless.

O Tamora, be call'd a gentle queen, And with thine own hands kill me in this place! For 'tis not life that I have begg'd so long, Poor I was slain when Bassianus died.

So should I rob my sweet sons of their fee: No, let them satisfy their lust on thee.

No grace? no womanhood? Ah, beastly creature! The blot and enemy to our general name! Confusion fall-- Nay, then I'll stop your mouth.

Bring thou her husband: This is the hole where Aaron bid us hide him.

DEMETRIUS throws the body of BASSIANUS into the  pit, then exeunt DEMETRIUS and CHIRON, dragging off LAVINIA Farewell, my sons: see that you make her sure.

Ne'er let my heart know merry cheer indeed, Till all the Andronici be made away.

Now will I hence to seek my lovely Moor, And let my spleenful sons this trull deflow'r.

Re-enter AARON, with QUINTUS and MARTIUS Come on, my lords, the better foot before: Straight will I bring you to the loathsome pit Where I espied the panther fast asleep.

And mine, I promise you, were't not for shame, Well could I leave our sport to sleep awhile.

To prove thou hast a true-divining heart, Aaron and thou look down into this den, And see a fearful sight of blood and death.

Lord Bassianus lies embrewed here, All on a heap, like to a slaughter'd lamb, In this detested, dark, blood-drinking pit.

O brother, help me with thy fainting hand-- If fear hath made thee faint, as me it hath-- Out of this fell devouring receptacle, As hateful as Cocytus' misty mouth.

Reach me thy hand, that I may help thee out, Or, wanting strength to do thee so much good, I may be pluck'd into the swallowing womb Of this deep pit, poor Bassianus' grave.

Thy hand once more, I will not loose again, Till thou art here aloft, or I below: Thou canst not come to me: I come to thee.

Falls in Along with me: I'll see what hole is here, And what he is that now is leap'd into it.

Say who art thou that lately didst descend Into this gaping hollow of the earth? The unhappy son of old Andronicus: Brought hither in a most unlucky hour, To find thy brother Bassianus dead.

My brother dead! I know thou dost but jest: He and his lady both are at the lodge Upon the north side of this pleasant chase, 'Tis not an hour since I left him there.

We know not where you left him all alive, But, out, alas! here have we found him dead.

Re-enter TAMORA, with Attendants, TITUS ANDRONICUS, and Lucius Where is my lord the king? Here, Tamora, though grieved with killing grief.

Where is thy brother Bassianus? Now to the bottom dost thou search my wound: Poor Bassianus here lies murdered.

Then all too late I bring this fatal writ, The complot of this timeless tragedy, And wonder greatly that man's face can fold In pleasing smiles such murderous tyranny.

She giveth SATURNINUS a letter Sweet huntsman, Bassianus 'tis we mean-- Do thou so much as dig the grave for him: Thou know'st our meaning.

Look for thy reward Among the nettles at the elder-tree Which overshades the mouth of that same pit Where we decreed to bury Bassianus.

O Tamora! was ever heard the like? This is the pit, and this the elder-tree.

Look, sirs, if you can find the huntsman out That should have murdered Bassianus here.

bloody kind, Have here bereft my brother of his life.

Sirs, drag them from the pit unto the prison: There let them bide until we have devised Some never-heard-of torturing pain for them.

Who found this letter? Tamora, was it you? Andronicus himself did take it up.

I did, my lord: yet let me be their bail, For, by my father's reverend tomb, I vow They shall be ready at your highness' will To answer their suspicion with their lives.

Some bring the murder'd body, some the murderers: Let them not speak a word, the guilt is plain, For, by my soul, were there worse end than death, That end upon them should be executed.

Andronicus, I will entreat the king, Fear not thy sons, they shall do well enough.

So, now go tell, an if thy tongue can speak, Who 'twas that cut thy tongue and ravish'd thee.

Write down thy mind, bewray thy meaning so, An if thy stumps will let thee play the scribe.

She hath no tongue to call, nor hands to wash, And so let's leave her to her silent walks.

But, sure, some Tereus hath deflowered thee, And, lest thou shouldst detect him, cut thy tongue.

For two and twenty sons I never wept, Because they died in honour's lofty bed.

O reverend tribunes! O gentle, aged men! Unbind my sons, reverse the doom of death, And let me say, that never wept before, My tears are now prevailing orators.

O noble father, you lament in vain: The tribunes hear you not, no man is by, And you recount your sorrows to a stone.

Grave tribunes, once more I entreat of you,-- My gracious lord, no tribune hears you speak.

A stone is soft as wax,--tribunes more hard than stones, A stone is silent, and offendeth not, And tribunes with their tongues doom men to death.

But wherefore stand'st thou with thy weapon drawn? To rescue my two brothers from their death: For which attempt the judges have pronounced My everlasting doom of banishment.

Ay me, this object kills me! Faint-hearted boy, arise, and look upon her.

'Tis well, Lavinia, that thou hast no hands, For hands, to do Rome service, are but vain.

This way to death my wretched sons are gone, Here stands my other son, a banished man, And here my brother, weeping at my woes.

But that which gives my soul the greatest spurn, Is dear Lavinia, dearer than my soul.

Look, Marcus! ah, son Lucius, look on her! When I did name her brothers, then fresh tears Stood on her cheeks, as doth the honey-dew Upon a gather'd lily almost wither'd.

Perchance she weeps because they kill'd her husband, Perchance because she knows them innocent.

If they did kill thy husband, then be joyful Because the law hath ta'en revenge on them.

No, no, they would not do so foul a deed, Witness the sorrow that their sister makes.

Sweet father, cease your tears, for, at your grief, See how my wretched sister sobs and weeps.

Good Titus, dry thine eyes. Ah, Marcus, Marcus! brother, well I wot Thy napkin cannot drink a tear of mine, For thou, poor man, hast drown'd it with thine own.

Nay, come, agree whose hand shall go along, For fear they die before their pardon come.

By heaven, it shall not go! Sirs, strive no more: such wither'd herbs as these Are meet for plucking up, and therefore mine.

Sweet father, if I shall be thought thy son, Let me redeem my brothers both from death.

And, for our father's sake and mother's care, Now let me show a brother's love to thee.

Come hither, Aaron, I'll deceive them both: Lend me thy hand, and I will give thee mine.

And never, whilst I live, deceive men so: But I'll deceive you in another sort, And that you'll say, ere half an hour pass.

Cuts off TITUS's hand Re-enter LUCIUS and MARCUS Now stay your strife: what shall be is dispatch'd.

Good Aaron, give his majesty my hand: Tell him it was a hand that warded him From thousand dangers, bid him bury it More hath it merited, that let it have.

As for my sons, say I account of them As jewels purchased at an easy price, And yet dear too, because I bought mine own.

I go, Andronicus: and for thy hand Look by and by to have thy sons with thee.

O, how this villany Doth fat me with the very thoughts of it! Let fools do good, and fair men call for grace.

O brother, speak with possibilities, And do not break into these deep extremes.

Is not my sorrow deep, having no bottom? Then be my passions bottomless with them.

Then give me leave, for losers will have leave To ease their stomachs with their bitter tongues.

Worthy Andronicus, ill art thou repaid For that good hand thou sent'st the emperor.

Now let hot AEtna cool in Sicily, And be my heart an ever-burning hell! These miseries are more than may be borne.

To weep with them that weep doth ease some deal, But sorrow flouted at is double death.

You heavy people, circle me about, That I may turn me to each one of you, And swear unto my soul to right your wrongs.

Come, brother, take a head, And in this hand the other I will bear.

Lavinia, thou shalt be employ'd: these arms! Bear thou my hand, sweet wench, between thy teeth.

If Lucius live, he will requite your wrongs, And make proud Saturnine and his empress Beg at the gates, like Tarquin and his queen.

Now will I to the Goths, and raise a power, To be revenged on Rome and Saturnine.

So, so, now sit: and look you eat no more Than will preserve just so much strength in us As will revenge these bitter woes of ours.

Marcus, unknit that sorrow-wreathen knot: Thy niece and I, poor creatures, want our hands, And cannot passionate our tenfold grief With folded arms.

This poor right hand of mine Is left to tyrannize upon my breast, Who, when my heart, all mad with misery, Beats in this hollow prison of my flesh, Then thus I thump it down.

To LAVINIA Thou map of woe, that thus dost talk in signs! When thy poor heart beats with outrageous beating, Thou canst not strike it thus to make it still.

Fie, brother, fie! teach her not thus to lay Such violent hands upon her tender life.

How now! has sorrow made thee dote already? Why, Marcus, no man should be mad but I.

Good grandsire, leave these bitter deep laments: Make my aunt merry with some pleasing tale.

Alas, the tender boy, in passion moved, Doth weep to see his grandsire's heaviness.

Peace, tender sapling, thou art made of tears, And tears will quickly melt thy life away.

MARCUS strikes the dish with a knife What dost thou strike at, Marcus, with thy knife? At that that I have kill'd, my lord, a fly.

Pardon me, sir, it was a black ill-favor'd fly, Like to the empress' Moor, therefore I kill'd him.

O, O, O, Then pardon me for reprehending thee, For thou hast done a charitable deed.

Give me thy knife, I will insult on him, Flattering myself, as if it were the Moor Come hither purposely to poison me.

Ah, sirrah! Yet, I think, we are not brought so low, But that between us we can kill a fly That comes in likeness of a coal-black Moor.

Alas, poor man! grief has so wrought on him, He takes false shadows for true substances.

Lavinia, go with me: I'll to thy closet, and go read with thee Sad stories chanced in the times of old.

Come, boy, and go with me: thy sight is young, And thou shalt read when mine begin to dazzle.

Help, grandsire, help! my aunt Lavinia Follows me every where, I know not why: Good uncle Marcus, see how swift she comes.

What means my niece Lavinia by these signs? Fear her not, Lucius: somewhat doth she mean: See, Lucius, see how much she makes of thee: Somewhither would she have thee go with her.

Ah, boy, Cornelia never with more care Read to her sons than she hath read to thee Sweet poetry and Tully's Orator.

But pardon me, sweet aunt: And, madam, if my uncle Marcus go, I will most willingly attend your ladyship.

LAVINIA turns over with her stumps the books which LUCIUS has let fall How now, Lavinia! Marcus, what means this? Some book there is that she desires to see.

But thou art deeper read, and better skill'd Come, and take choice of all my library, And so beguile thy sorrow, till the heavens Reveal the damn'd contriver of this deed.

Why lifts she up her arms in sequence thus? I think she means that there was more than one Confederate in the fact: ay, more there was, Or else to heaven she heaves them for revenge.

Lucius, what book is that she tosseth so? Grandsire, 'tis Ovid's Metamorphoses, My mother gave it me.

For love of her that's gone, Perhaps she cull'd it from among the rest.

See, brother, see, note how she quotes the leaves.

Ay, that's my boy! thy father hath full oft For his ungrateful country done the like.

Marcus, look to my house: Lucius and I'll go brave it at the court: Ay, marry, will we, sir, and we'll be waited on.

Revenge, ye heavens, for old Andronicus! Demetrius, here's the son of Lucius, He hath some message to deliver us.

My lords, with all the humbleness I may, I greet your honours from Andronicus.

And pray the Roman gods confound you both! Gramercy, lovely Lucius: what's the news? For villains mark'd with rape.

What's here? A scroll, and written round about? Let's see, 'Integer vitae, scelerisque purus, Non eget Mauri jaculis, nec arcu.

O, 'tis a verse in Horace, I know it well: I read it in the grammar long ago.

Now, what a thing it is to be an ass! Here's no sound jest! the old man hath found their guilt, And sends them weapons wrapped about with lines, That wound, beyond their feeling, to the quick.

But were our witty empress well afoot, She would applaud Andronicus' conceit: But let her rest in her unrest awhile.

But me more good, to see so great a lord Basely insinuate and send us gifts.

Had he not reason, Lord Demetrius? Did you not use his daughter very friendly? I would we had a thousand Roman dames At such a bay, by turn to serve our lust.

Come, let us go, and pray to all the gods For our beloved mother in her pains.

Trumpets sound within Why do the emperor's trumpets flourish thus? Belike, for joy the emperor hath a son.

Well, God give her good rest! What hath he sent her? A devil.

'Zounds, ye whore! is black so base a hue? Sweet blowse, you are a beauteous blossom, sure.

Villain, what hast thou done? That which thou canst not undo.

Woe to her chance, and damn'd her loathed choice! Accursed the offspring of so foul a fiend! It shall not live.

What, must it, nurse? then let no man but I Do execution on my flesh and blood.

I'll broach the tadpole on my rapier's point: Nurse, give it me, my sword shall soon dispatch it.

Tell the empress from me, I am of age To keep mine own, excuse it how she can.

Aaron, what shall I say unto the empress? Advise thee, Aaron, what is to be done, And we will all subscribe to thy advice: Save thou the child, so we may all be safe.

My son and I will have the wind of you: Keep there: now talk at pleasure of your safety.

But say, again, how many saw the child? Cornelia the midwife and myself, And no one else but the deliver'd empress.

The empress, the midwife, and yourself: Two may keep counsel when the third's away: Go to the empress, tell her this I said.

He kills the nurse Weke, weke! so cries a pig prepared to the spit.

The midwife and the nurse well made away, Then let the ladies tattle what they please.

Aaron, I see thou wilt not trust the air With secrets.

For this care of Tamora, Herself and hers are highly bound to thee.

Now to the Goths, as swift as swallow flies, There to dispose this treasure in mine arms, And secretly to greet the empress' friends.

Sir boy, now let me see your archery, Look ye draw home enough, and 'tis there straight.

Terras Astraea reliquit: Be you remember'd, Marcus, she's gone, she's fled.

Ah, Rome! Well, well, I made thee miserable What time I threw the people's suffrages On him that thus doth tyrannize o'er me.

Go, get you gone, and pray be careful all, And leave you not a man-of-war unsearch'd: This wicked emperor may have shipp'd her hence, And, kinsmen, then we may go pipe for justice.

Join with the Goths, and with revengeful war Take wreak on Rome for this ingratitude, And vengeance on the traitor Saturnine.

I'll dive into the burning lake below, And pull her out of Acheron by the heels.

Of my word, I have written to effect, There's not a god left unsolicited.

Kinsmen, shoot all your shafts into the court: We will afflict the emperor in his pride.

They shoot O, well said, Lucius! Good boy, in Virgo's lap, give it Pallas.

My lord, I aim a mile beyond the moon, Your letter is with Jupiter by this.

Ha, ha! Publius, Publius, what hast thou done? See, see, thou hast shot off one of Taurus' horns.

Why, there it goes: God give his lordship joy! News, news from heaven! Marcus, the post is come.

Sirrah, what tidings? have you any letters? Shall I have justice? what says Jupiter? O, the gibbet-maker! he says that he hath taken them down again, for the man must not be hanged till the next week.

But what says Jupiter, I ask thee? Alas, sir, I know not Jupiter, I never drank with him in all my life.

Why, villain, art not thou the carrier? Ay, of my pigeons, sir, nothing else.

Why, didst thou not come from heaven? From heaven! alas, sir, I never came there     God forbid I should be so bold to press to heaven in my young days.

Why, I am going with my pigeons to the tribunal plebs, to take up a matter of brawl betwixt my uncle and one of the emperial's men.

Why, sir, that is as fit as can be to serve for your oration, and let him deliver the pigeons to the emperor from you.

Tell me, can you deliver an oration to the emperor with a grace? Nay, truly, sir, I could never say grace in all my life.

Sirrah, come hither: make no more ado, But give your pigeons to the emperor: By me thou shalt have justice at his hands.

Hold, hold, meanwhile here's money for thy charges.

Sirrah, can you with a grace deliver a supplication? Ay, sir.

And when you come to him, at the first approach you must kneel, then kiss his foot, then deliver up your pigeons, and then look for your reward.

Here, Marcus, fold it in the oration, For thou hast made it like an humble suppliant.

And when thou hast given it the emperor, Knock at my door, and tell me what he says.

Why, thus it shall become High-witted Tamora to gloze with all: But, Titus, I have touched thee to the quick, Thy life-blood out: if Aaron now be wise, Then is all safe, the anchor's in the port.

How now, good fellow! wouldst thou speak with us? Yea, forsooth, an your mistership be emperial.

God and Saint Stephen give you good den: I have brought you a letter and a couple of pigeons here.

SATURNINUS reads the letter Go, take him away, and hang him presently.

How much money must I have? Come, sirrah, you must be hanged.

Hanged! by'r lady, then I have brought up a neck to a fair end.

What news with thee, AEmilius? Arm, arm, my lord,--Rome never had more cause.

Why should you fear? is not your city strong? Ay, but the citizens favor Lucius, And will revolt from me to succor him.

To AEmilius Go thou before, be our ambassador: Say that the emperor requests a parley Of warlike Lucius, and appoint the meeting Even at his father's house, the old Andronicus.

AEmilius, do this message honourably: And if he stand on hostage for his safety, Bid him demand what pledge will please him best.

Now will I to that old Andronicus, And temper him with all the art I have, To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths.

And now, sweet emperor, be blithe again, And bury all thy fear in my devices.

Approved warriors, and my faithful friends, I have received letters from great Rome, Which signify what hate they bear their emperor And how desirous of our sight they are.

Therefore, great lords, be, as your titles witness, Imperious and impatient of your wrongs, And wherein Rome hath done you any scath, Let him make treble satisfaction.

Peace, villain, peace!'--even thus he rates the babe,-- 'For I must bear thee to a trusty Goth, Who, when he knows thou art the empress' babe, Will hold thee dearly for thy mother's sake.

With this, my weapon drawn, I rush'd upon him, Surprised him suddenly, and brought him hither, To use as you think needful of the man.

O worthy Goth, this is the incarnate devil That robb'd Andronicus of his good hand, This is the pearl that pleased your empress' eye, And here's the base fruit of his burning lust.

Say, wall-eyed slave, whither wouldst thou convey This growing image of thy fiend-like face? Why dost not speak? what, deaf? not a word? A halter, soldiers! hang him on this tree.

First hang the child, that he may see it sprawl, A sight to vex the father's soul withal.

A ladder brought, which AARON is made to ascend Lucius, save the child, And bear it from me to the empress.

O most insatiate and luxurious woman! Tut, Lucius, this was but a deed of charity To that which thou shalt hear of me anon.

'Twas her two sons that murder'd Bassianus, They cut thy sister's tongue and ravish'd her And cut her hands and trimm'd her as thou saw'st.

O detestable villain! call'st thou that trimming? Why, she was wash'd and cut and trimm'd, and 'twas Trim sport for them that had the doing of it.

What, canst thou say all this, and never blush? Ay, like a black dog, as the saying is.

Art thou not sorry for these heinous deeds? Ay, that I had not done a thousand more.

Tut, I have done a thousand dreadful things As willingly as one would kill a fly, And nothing grieves me heartily indeed But that I cannot do ten thousand more.

Bring down the devil, for he must not die So sweet a death as hanging presently.

My lord, there is a messenger from Rome Desires to be admitted to your presence.

What says our general? AEmilius, let the emperor give his pledges Unto my father and my uncle Marcus, And we will come.

March away. Thus, in this strange and sad habiliment, I will encounter with Andronicus, And say I am Revenge, sent from below To join with him and right his heinous wrongs.

Knock at his study, where, they say, he keeps, To ruminate strange plots of dire revenge, Tell him Revenge is come to join with him, And work confusion on his enemies.

No, not a word, how can I grace my talk, Wanting a hand to give it action? Thou hast the odds of me, therefore no more.

If thou didst know me, thou wouldest talk with me.

Art thou Revenge? and art thou sent to me, To be a torment to mine enemies? I am, therefore come down, and welcome me.

Are these thy ministers? what are they call'd? Rapine and Murder, therefore called so, Cause they take vengeance of such kind of men.

Good Lord, how like the empress' sons they are! And you, the empress! but we worldly men Have miserable, mad, mistaking eyes.

O sweet Revenge, now do I come to thee, And, if one arm's embracement will content thee, I will embrace thee in it by and by.

Long have I been forlorn, and all for thee: Welcome, dread Fury, to my woful house: Rapine and Murder, you are welcome too.

What shall we do? What wouldst thou have us do, Andronicus? Show me a murderer, I'll deal with him.

Show me a villain that hath done a rape, And I am sent to be revenged on him.

Show me a thousand that have done thee wrong, And I will be revenged on them all.

Look round about the wicked streets of Rome, And when thou find'st a man that's like thyself.

Go thou with him, and when it is thy hap To find another that is like to thee, Good Rapine, stab him, he's a ravisher.

What says Andronicus to this device? Marcus, my brother! 'tis sad Titus calls.

This do thou for my love, and so let him, As he regards his aged father's life.

Now will I hence about thy business, And take my ministers along with me.

Nay, nay, let Rape and Murder stay with me, Or else I'll call my brother back again, And cleave to no revenge but Lucius.

bide with him, Whiles I go tell my lord the emperor How I have govern'd our determined jest? Yield to his humour, smooth and speak him fair, And tarry with him till I turn again.

And will o'erreach them in their own devices: A pair of cursed hell-hounds and their dam! Madam, depart at pleasure, leave us here.

Farewell, Andronicus: Revenge now goes To lay a complot to betray thy foes.

Tell us, old man, how shall we be employ'd? Tut, I have work enough for you to do.

Publius, come hither, Caius, and Valentine! What is your will? Know you these two? The empress' sons, I take them, Chiron and Demetrius.

Fie, Publius, fie! thou art too much deceived, The one is Murder, Rape is the other's name, And therefore bind them, gentle Publius.

Oft have you heard me wish for such an hour, And now I find it, therefore bind them sure, And stop their mouths, if they begin to cry.

lay hold on CHIRON and DEMETRIUS Villains, forbear! we are the empress' sons.

Stop close their mouths, let them not speak a word.

Re-enter TITUS, with LAVINIA, he bearing a knife, and she a basin Come, come, Lavinia, look, thy foes are bound.

Sirs, stop their mouths, let them not speak to me, But let them hear what fearful words I utter.

O villains, Chiron and Demetrius! Here stands the spring whom you have stain'd with mud, This goodly summer with your winter mix'd.

What would you say, if I should let you speak? Villains, for shame you could not beg for grace.

This one hand yet is left to cut your throats, Whilst that Lavinia 'tween her stumps doth hold The basin that receives your guilty blood.

Come, come, be every one officious To make this banquet, which I wish may prove More stern and bloody than the Centaurs' feast.

So, now bring them in, for I'll play the cook, And see them ready 'gainst their mother comes.

Uncle Marcus, since it is my father's mind That I repair to Rome, I am content.

What, hath the firmament more suns than one? What boots it thee to call thyself a sun? Rome's emperor, and nephew, break the parle, These quarrels must be quietly debated.

The feast is ready, which the careful Titus Hath ordain'd to an honourable end, For peace, for love, for league, and good to Rome: Please you, therefore, draw nigh, and take your places.

Why art thou thus attired, Andronicus? Because I would be sure to have all well, To entertain your highness and your empress.

My lord the emperor, resolve me this: Was it well done of rash Virginius To slay his daughter with his own right hand, Because she was enforced, stain'd, and deflower'd? It was, Andronicus.

Your reason, mighty lord? Because the girl should not survive her shame, And by her presence still renew his sorrows.

A reason mighty, strong, and effectual, A pattern, precedent, and lively warrant, For me, most wretched, to perform the like.

Die, die, Lavinia, and thy shame with thee, Kills LAVINIA And, with thy shame, thy father's sorrow die! What hast thou done, unnatural and unkind? Kill'd her, for whom my tears have made me blind.

I am as woful as Virginius was, And have a thousand times more cause than he To do this outrage: and it now is done.

Why, there they are both, baked in that pie, Whereof their mother daintily hath fed, Eating the flesh that she herself hath bred.

'Tis true, 'tis true, witness my knife's sharp point.

Kills TAMORA Die, frantic wretch, for this accursed deed! Kills TITUS Can the son's eye behold his father bleed? There's meed for meed, death for a deadly deed! Kills SATURNINUS.

Here is a captain, let him tell the tale, Your hearts will throb and weep to hear him speak.

Lastly, myself unkindly banished, The gates shut on me, and turn'd weeping out, To beg relief among Rome's enemies: Who drown'd their enmity in my true tears.

I am the turned forth, be it known to you, That have preserved her welfare in my blood, And from her bosom took the enemy's point, Sheathing the steel in my adventurous body.

Alas, you know I am no vaunter, I, My scars can witness, dumb although they are, That my report is just and full of truth.

But, soft! methinks I do digress too much, Citing my worthless praise: O, pardon me, For when no friends are by, men praise themselves.

Now judge what cause had Titus to revenge These wrongs, unspeakable, past patience, Or more than any living man could bear.

And on the ragged stones beat forth our brains, And make a mutual closure of our house.

Speak, Romans, speak, and if you say we shall, Lo, hand in hand, Lucius and I will fall.

Come, come, thou reverend man of Rome, And bring our emperor gently in thy hand, Lucius our emperor, for well I know The common voice do cry it shall be so.

O grandsire, grandsire! even with all my heart Would I were dead, so you did live again! O Lord, I cannot speak to him for weeping, My tears will choke me, if I ope my mouth.

Re-enter Attendants with AARON You sad Andronici, have done with woes: Give sentence on this execrable wretch, That hath been breeder of these dire events.

Set him breast-deep in earth, and famish him, There let him stand, and rave, and cry for food, If any one relieves or pities him, For the offence he dies.

This is our doom: Some stay to see him fasten'd in the earth.

Some loving friends convey the emperor hence, And give him burial in his father's grave: My father and Lavinia shall forthwith Be closed in our household's monument.

See justice done on Aaron, that damn'd Moor, By whom our heavy haps had their beginning: Then, afterwards, to order well the state, That like events may ne'er it ruinate.

Like or find fault, do as your pleasures are: Now good or bad, 'tis but the chance of war.

Well, I have told you enough of this: for my part, I'll not meddle nor make no further.

He that will have a cake out of the wheat must needs tarry the grinding.

Have I not tarried? Ay, the grinding, but you must tarry the bolting.

Have I not tarried? Ay, the bolting, but you must tarry the leavening.

Patience herself, what goddess e'er she be, Doth lesser blench at sufferance than I do.

I will not dispraise your sister Cassandra's wit, but-- O Pandarus! I tell thee, Pandarus,-- When I do tell thee, there my hopes lie drown'd, Reply not in how many fathoms deep They lie indrench'd.

Let her be as she is: if she be fair, 'tis the better for her, an she be not, she has the mends in her own hands.

Good Pandarus, how now, Pandarus! I have had my labour for my travail, ill-thought on of her and ill-thought on of you, gone between and between, but small thanks for my labour.

What, art thou angry, Pandarus? what, with me? Because she's kin to me, therefore she's not so fair as Helen: an she were not kin to me, she would be as fair on Friday as Helen is on Sunday.

But what care I? I care not an she were a black-a-moor, 'tis all one to me.

Say I she is not fair? I do not care whether you do or no.

She's a fool to stay behind her father, let her to the Greeks, and so I'll tell her the next time I see her: for my part, I'll meddle nor make no more i' the matter.

Sweet Pandarus,-- Pray you, speak no more to me: I will leave all as I found it, and there an end.

Peace, you ungracious clamours! peace, rude sounds! Fools on both sides! Helen must needs be fair, When with your blood you daily paint her thus.

I cannot fight upon this argument, It is too starved a subject for my sword.

But Pandarus,--O gods, how do you plague me! I cannot come to Cressid but by Pandar, And he's as tetchy to be woo'd to woo.

Enter AENEAS How now, Prince Troilus! wherefore not afield? Because not there: this woman's answer sorts, For womanish it is to be from thence.

What news, AEneas, from the field to-day? That Paris is returned home and hurt.

Let Paris bleed, 'tis but a scar to scorn, Paris is gored with Menelaus' horn.

Hark, what good sport is out of town to-day! Better at home, if 'would I might' were 'may.

But to the sport abroad: are you bound thither? In all swift haste.

And whither go they? Up to the eastern tower, Whose height commands as subject all the vale, To see the battle.

What was his cause of anger? The noise goes, this: there is among the Greeks A lord of Trojan blood, nephew to Hector, They call him Ajax.

Good, and what of him? They say he is a very man per se, And stands alone.

So do all men, unless they are drunk, sick, or have no legs.

What's that? what's that? Good morrow, uncle Pandarus.

Good morrow, cousin Cressid: what do you talk of? Good morrow, Alexander.

How do you, cousin? When were you at Ilium? This morning, uncle.

What were you talking of when I came? Was Hector armed and gone ere ye came to Ilium? Helen was not up, was she? Hector was gone, but Helen was not up.

True, he was so: I know the cause too: he'll lay about him to-day, I can tell them that: and there's Troilus will not come far behind him: let them take heed of Troilus, I can tell them that too.

What, is he angry too? Who, Troilus? Troilus is the better man of the two.

What, not between Troilus and Hector? Do you know a man if you see him? Ay, if I ever saw him before and knew him.

Then you say as I say, for, I am sure, he is not Hector.

Himself! no, he's not himself: would a' were himself! Well, the gods are above, time must friend or end: well, Troilus, well: I would my heart were in her body.

No, Hector is not a better man than Troilus. Excuse me.

Th' other's not come to't, you shall tell me another tale, when th' other's come to't.

You have no judgment, niece: Helen herself swore th' other day, that Troilus, for a brown favour--for so 'tis, I must confess,-- not brown neither,-- No, but brown.

Then Troilus should have too much: if she praised him above, his complexion is higher than his, he having colour enough, and the other higher, is too flaming a praise for a good complexion.

I had as lief Helen's golden tongue had commended Troilus for a copper nose.

I think Helen loves him better than Paris. Then she's a merry Greek indeed.

Why, he is very young: and yet will he, within three pound, lift as much as his brother Hector.

Why, go to, then: but to prove to you that Helen loves Troilus,-- Troilus will stand to the proof, if you'll prove it so.

Troilus! why, he esteems her no more than I esteem an addle egg.

If you love an addle egg as well as you love an idle head, you would eat chickens i' the shell.

I cannot choose but laugh, to think how she tickled his chin: indeed, she has a marvellous white hand, I must needs confess,-- Without the rack.

And she takes upon her to spy a white hair on his chin.

But there was such laughing! Queen Hecuba laughed that her eyes ran o'er.

But there was more temperate fire under the pot of her eyes: did her eyes run o'er too? And Hector laughed.

At what was all this laughing? Marry, at the white hair that Helen spied on Troilus' chin.

An't had been a green hair, I should have laughed They laughed not so much at the hair as at his pretty answer.

What was his answer? Quoth she, 'Here's but two and fifty hairs on your chin, and one of them is white.

'Two and fifty hairs' quoth he, 'and one white: that white hair is my father, and all the rest are his sons.

'Jupiter!' quoth she, 'which of these hairs is Paris, my husband? 'The forked one,' quoth he, 'pluck't out, and give it him.

But there was such laughing! and Helen so blushed, an Paris so chafed, and all the rest so laughed, that it passed.

I told you a thing yesterday, think on't. So I do.

I'll be sworn 'tis true, he will weep you, an 'twere a man born in April.

And I'll spring up in his tears, an 'twere a nettle against May.

A retreat sounded Hark! they are coming from the field: shall we stand up here, and see them as they pass toward Ilium? good niece, do, sweet niece Cressida.

Here, here, here's an excellent place, here we may see most bravely: I'll tell you them all by their names as they pass by, but mark Troilus above the rest.

AENEAS passes That's AEneas: is not that a brave man? he's one of the flowers of Troy, I can tell you: but mark Troilus, you shall see anon.

ANTENOR passes Who's that? That's Antenor: he has a shrewd wit, I can tell you, and he's a man good enough, he's one o' the soundest judgments in whosoever, and a proper man of person.

When comes Troilus? I'll show you Troilus anon: if he see me, you shall see him nod at me.

HECTOR passes That's Hector, that, that, look you, that, there's a fellow! Go thy way, Hector! There's a brave man, niece.

O brave Hector! Look how he looks! there's a countenance! is't not a brave man? O, a brave man! Is a' not? it does a man's heart good.

Yonder comes Paris, yonder comes Paris. PARIS passes Look ye yonder, niece, is't not a gallant man too, is't not? Why, this is brave now.

Who said he came hurt home to-day? he's not hurt: why, this will do Helen's heart good now, ha! Would I could see Troilus now! You shall see Troilus anon.

I think he went not forth to-day. That's Helenus. Can Helenus fight, uncle? Helenus? no.

Yes, he'll fight indifferent well. I marvel where Troilus is.

Hark! do you not hear the people cry 'Troilus'? Helenus is a priest.

What sneaking fellow comes yonder? TROILUS passes Where? yonder? that's Deiphobus.

'Tis Troilus! there's a man, niece! Hem! Brave Troilus! the prince of chivalry! Peace, for shame, peace! Mark him, note him.

Go thy way, Troilus, go thy way! Had I a sister were a grace, or a daughter a goddess, he should take his choice.

O admirable man! Paris? Paris is dirt to him, and, I warrant, Helen, to change, would give an eye to boot.

Forces pass Asses, fools, dolts! chaff and bran, chaff and bran! porridge after meat! I could live and die i' the eyes of Troilus.

Ne'er look, ne'er look: the eagles are gone: crows and daws, crows and daws! I had rather be such a man as Troilus than Agamemnon and all Greece.

There is among the Greeks Achilles, a better man than Troilus.

You are such another! Sir, my lord would instantly speak with you.

Words, vows, gifts, tears, and love's full sacrifice, He offers in another's enterprise, But more in Troilus thousand fold I see Than in the glass of Pandar's praise may be, Yet hold I off.

Women are angels, wooing: Things won are done, joy's soul lies in the doing.

That she beloved knows nought that knows not this: Men prize the thing ungain'd more than it is: That she was never yet that ever knew Love got so sweet as when desire did sue.

Therefore this maxim out of love I teach: Achievement is command, ungain'd, beseech: Then though my heart's content firm love doth bear, Nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear.

With due observance of thy godlike seat, Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply Thy latest words.

Thou great commander, nerve and bone of Greece, Heart of our numbers, soul and only spirit.

In whom the tempers and the minds of all Should be shut up, hear what Ulysses speaks.

Troy, yet upon his basis, had been down, And the great Hector's sword had lack'd a master, But for these instances.

The specialty of rule hath been neglected: And, look, how many Grecian tents do stand Hollow upon this plain, so many hollow factions.

When that the general is not like the hive To whom the foragers shall all repair, What honey is expected? Degree being vizarded, The unworthiest shows as fairly in the mask.

Great Agamemnon, This chaos, when degree is suffocate, Follows the choking.

And this neglection of degree it is That by a pace goes backward, with a purpose It hath to climb.

To end a tale of length, Troy in our weakness stands, not in her strength.

Most wisely hath Ulysses here discover'd The fever whereof all our power is sick.

At this fusty stuff The large Achilles, on his press'd bed lolling, From his deep chest laughs out a loud applause, Cries 'Excellent! 'tis Agamemnon just.

Now play me Nestor, hem, and stroke thy beard, As he being drest to some oration.

That's done, as near as the extremest ends Of parallels, as like as Vulcan and his wife: Yet god Achilles still cries 'Excellent! 'Tis Nestor right.

Now play him me, Patroclus, Arming to answer in a night alarm.

And in the imitation of these twain-- Who, as Ulysses says, opinion crowns With an imperial voice--many are infect.

Let this be granted, and Achilles' horse Makes many Thetis' sons.

What would you 'fore our tent? Is this great Agamemnon's tent, I pray you? Even this.

What's your affair I pray you? Sir, pardon, 'tis for Agamemnon's ears.

Nor I from Troy come not to whisper him: I bring a trumpet to awake his ear, To set his sense on the attentive bent, And then to speak.

Speak frankly as the wind, It is not Agamemnon's sleeping hour: That thou shalt know.

Trumpet, blow loud, Send thy brass voice through all these lazy tents, And every Greek of mettle, let him know, What Troy means fairly shall be spoke aloud.

Now heavens forbid such scarcity of youth! Fair Lord AEneas, let me touch your hand, To our pavilion shall I lead you, sir.

Achilles shall have word of this intent, So shall each lord of Greece, from tent to tent: Yourself shall feast with us before you go And find the welcome of a noble foe.

What says Ulysses? I have a young conception in my brain, Be you my time to bring it to some shape.

Well, and how? This challenge that the gallant Hector sends, However it is spread in general name, Relates in purpose only to Achilles.

Give pardon to my speech: Therefore 'tis meet Achilles meet not Hector.

Let us, like merchants, show our foulest wares, And think, perchance, they'll sell, if not, The lustre of the better yet to show, Shall show the better.

Do not consent That ever Hector and Achilles meet, For both our honour and our shame in this Are dogg'd with two strange followers.

If the dull brainless Ajax come safe off, We'll dress him up in voices: if he fail, Yet go we under our opinion still That we have better men.

But, hit or miss, Our project's life this shape of sense assumes: Ajax employ'd plucks down Achilles' plumes.

Now I begin to relish thy advice, And I will give a taste of it forthwith To Agamemnon: go we to him straight.

Two curs shall tame each other: pride alone Must tarre the mastiffs on, as 'twere their bone.

Agamemnon, how if he had boils? full, all over, And those boils did run? say so: did not the general run then? were not that a botchy core? Then would come some matter from him, I see none now.

Thou bitch-wolf's son, canst thou not hear? Beating him Feel, then.

The plague of Greece upon thee, thou mongrel beef-witted lord! Speak then, thou vinewedst leaven, speak: I will beat thee into handsomeness.

I shall sooner rail thee into wit and holiness: but, I think, thy horse will sooner con an oration than thou learn a prayer without book.

Thou canst strike, canst thou? a red murrain o' thy jade's tricks! Toadstool, learn me the proclamation.

Dost thou think I have no sense, thou strikest me thus? The proclamation! Thou art proclaimed a fool, I think.

I would thou didst itch from head to foot and I had the scratching of thee, I would make thee the loathsomest scab in Greece.

When thou art forth in the incursions, thou strikest as slow as another.

I say, the proclamation! Thou grumblest and railest every hour on Achilles, and thou art as full of envy at his greatness as Cerberus is at Proserpine's beauty, ay, that thou barkest at him.

He would pun thee into shivers with his fist, as a sailor breaks a biscuit.

If thou use to beat me, I will begin at thy heel, and tell what thou art by inches, thou thing of no bowels, thou! You dog! You scurvy lord! Mars his idiot! do, rudeness, do, camel, do, do.

Why, how now, Ajax! wherefore do you thus? How now, Thersites! what's the matter, man? You see him there, do you? Ay, what's the matter? Nay, look upon him.

So I do: what's the matter? Nay, but regard him well.

But yet you look not well upon him, for whosoever you take him to be, he is Ajax.

Lo, lo, lo, lo, what modicums of wit he utters! his evasions have ears thus long.

I have bobbed his brain more than he has beat my bones: I will buy nine sparrows for a penny, and his pia mater is not worth the nineth part of a sparrow.

This lord, Achilles, Ajax, who wears his wit in his belly and his guts in his head, I'll tell you what I say of I say, this Ajax-- Ajax offers to beat him Nay, good Ajax.

As will stop the eye of Helen's needle, for whom he comes to fight.

Peace, fool! I would have peace and quietness, but the fool will not: he there: that he: look you there.

O thou damned cur! I shall-- Will you set your wit to a fool's? No, I warrant you, for a fools will shame it.

What's the quarrel? I bade the vile owl go learn me the tenor of the proclamation, and he rails upon me.

Your last service was sufferance, 'twas not voluntary: no man is beaten voluntary: Ajax was here the voluntary, and you as under an impress.

E'en so, a great deal of your wit, too, lies in your sinews, or else there be liars.

Hector have a great catch, if he knock out either of your brains: a' were as good crack a fusty nut with no kernel.

What, with me too, Thersites? There's Ulysses and old Nestor, whose wit was mouldy ere your grandsires had nails on their toes, yoke you like draught-oxen and make you plough up the wars.

What, what? Yes, good sooth: to, Achilles! to, Ajax! to! I shall cut out your tongue.

'Tis no matter! I shall speak as much as thou No more words, Thersites, peace! I will hold my peace when Achilles' brach bids me, shall I? There's for you, Patroclus.

I will see you hanged, like clotpoles, ere I come any more to your tents: I will keep where there is wit stirring and leave the faction of fools.

Who shall answer him? I know not: 'tis put to lottery, otherwise He knew his man.

Brother, she is not worth what she doth cost The holding.

Why keep we her? the Grecians keep our aunt: Is she worth keeping? why, she is a pearl, Whose price hath launch'd above a thousand ships, And turn'd crown'd kings to merchants.

Cry, Trojans, cry! lend me ten thousand eyes, And I will fill them with prophetic tears.

Peace, sister, peace! Virgins and boys, mid-age and wrinkled eld, Soft infancy, that nothing canst but cry, Add to my clamours! let us pay betimes A moiety of that mass of moan to come.

Cry, Trojans, cry! practise your eyes with tears! Troy must not be, nor goodly Ilion stand, Our firebrand brother, Paris, burns us all.

Cry, Trojans, cry! a Helen and a woe: Cry, cry! Troy burns, or else let Helen go.

Paris, you speak Like one besotted on your sweet delights: You have the honey still, but these the gall, So to be valiant is no praise at all.

Sir, I propose not merely to myself The pleasures such a beauty brings with it, But I would have the soil of her fair rape Wiped off, in honourable keeping her.

Why, there you touch'd the life of our design: Were it not glory that we more affected Than the performance of our heaving spleens, I would not wish a drop of Trojan blood Spent more in her defence.

I am yours, You valiant offspring of great Priamus.

'Sfoot, I'll learn to conjure and raise devils, but I'll see some issue of my spiteful execrations.

Then there's Achilles, a rare enginer! If Troy be not taken till these two undermine it, the walls will stand till they fall of themselves.

After this, the vengeance on the whole camp! or rather, the bone-ache! for that, methinks, is the curse dependent on those that war for a placket.

What ho! my Lord Achilles! Who's there? Thersites! Good Thersites, come in and rail.

Where's Achilles? What, art thou devout? wast thou in prayer? Ay: the heavens hear me! Who's there? Thersites, my lord.

Where, where? Art thou come? why, my cheese, my digestion, why hast thou not served thyself in to my table so many meals? Come, what's Agamemnon? Thy commander, Achilles.

Then tell me, Patroclus, what's Achilles? Thy lord, Thersites: then tell me, I pray thee, what's thyself? Thy knower, Patroclus: then tell me, Patroclus, what art thou? Thou mayst tell that knowest.

Agamemnon commands Achilles, Achilles is my lord, I am Patroclus' knower, and Patroclus is a fool.

Proceed, Thersites. Agamemnon is a fool, Achilles is a fool, Thersites is a fool, and, as aforesaid, Patroclus is a fool.

Agamemnon is a fool to offer to command Achilles, Achilles is a fool to be commanded of Agamemnon, Thersites is a fool to serve such a fool, and Patroclus is a fool positive.

Look you, who comes here? Patroclus, I'll speak with nobody.

Here is such patchery, such juggling and such knavery! all the argument is a cuckold and a whore, a good quarrel to draw emulous factions and bleed to death upon.

Now, the dry serpigo on the subject! and war and lechery confound all! Where is Achilles? Within his tent, but ill disposed, my lord.

He shent our messengers, and we lay by Our appertainments, visiting of him: Let him be told so, lest perchance he think We dare not move the question of our place, Or know not what we are.

We saw him at the opening of his tent: He is not sick.

Yes, lion-sick, sick of proud heart: you may call it melancholy, if you will favour the man, but, by my head, 'tis pride: but why, why? let him show us the cause.

A word, my lord. Takes AGAMEMNON aside What moves Ajax thus to bay at him? Achilles hath inveigled his fool from him.

Who, Thersites? Then will Ajax lack matter, if he have lost his argument.

No, you see, he is his argument that has his argument, Achilles.

All the better, their fraction is more our wish than their faction: but it was a strong composure a fool could disunite.

The amity that wisdom knits not, folly may easily untie.

Here comes Patroclus. Re-enter PATROCLUS No Achilles with him.

The elephant hath joints, but none for courtesy: his legs are legs for necessity, not for flexure.

Hear you, Patroclus: We are too well acquainted with these answers: But his evasion, wing'd thus swift with scorn, Cannot outfly our apprehensions.

Tell him so. I shall, and bring his answer presently.

In second voice we'll not be satisfied, We come to speak with him.

Ulysses, enter you. What is he more than another? No more than what he thinks he is.

Is he so much? Do you not think he thinks himself a better man than I am? No question.

Will you subscribe his thought, and say he is? No, noble Ajax, you are as strong, as valiant, as wise, no less noble, much more gentle, and altogether more tractable.

Why should a man be proud? How doth pride grow? I know not what pride is.

Your mind is the clearer, Ajax, and your virtues the fairer.

He that is proud eats up himself: pride is his own glass, his own trumpet, his own chronicle, and whatever praises itself but in the deed, devours the deed in the praise.

I do hate a proud man, as I hate the engendering of toads.

Yet he loves himself: is't not strange? Re-enter ULYSSES Achilles will not to the field to-morrow.

What's his excuse? He doth rely on none, But carries on the stream of his dispose Without observance or respect of any, In will peculiar and in self-admission.

Dear lord, go you and greet him in his tent: 'Tis said he holds you well, and will be led At your request a little from himself.

This lord go to him! Jupiter forbid, And say in thunder 'Achilles go to him.

this applause! If I go to him, with my armed fist I'll pash him o'er the face.

An a' be proud with me, I'll pheeze his pride: Let me go to him.

A paltry, insolent fellow! How he describes himself! Can he not be sociable? The raven chides blackness.

He will be the physician that should be the patient.

An all men were o' my mind,-- Wit would be out of fashion.

A' should not bear it so, a' should eat swords first: shall pride carry it? An 'twould, you'ld carry half.

He's not yet through warm: force him with praises: pour in, pour in, his ambition is dry.

Here is a man--but 'tis before his face, I will be silent.

Wherefore should you so? He is not emulous, as Achilles is.

There is no tarrying here, the hart Achilles Keeps thicket.

Let Achilles sleep: Light boats sail swift, though greater hulks draw deep.

Friend, you! pray you, a word: do not you follow the young Lord Paris? Ay, sir, when he goes before me.

You depend upon him, I mean? Sir, I do depend upon the lord.

You depend upon a noble gentleman, I must needs praise him.

The lord be praised! You know me, do you not? Faith, sir, superficially.

Grace! not so, friend: honour and lordship are my titles.

Music within What music is this? I do but partly know, sir: it is music in parts.

At whose pleasure, friend At mine, sir, and theirs that love music.

Who shall I command, sir? Friend, we understand not one another: I am too courtly and thou art too cunning.

I come to speak with Paris from the Prince Troilus: I will make a complimental assault upon him, for my business seethes.

You have broke it, cousin: and, by my life, you shall make it whole again, you shall piece it out with a piece of your performance.

O, sir,-- Rude, in sooth, in good sooth, very rude.

My lord, will you vouchsafe me a word? Nay, this shall not hedge us out: we'll hear you sing, certainly.

Nay, that shall not serve your turn, that shall not, in truth, la.

And, my lord, he desires you, that if the king call for him at supper, you will make his excuse.

My Lord Pandarus,-- What says my sweet queen, my very very sweet queen? What exploit's in hand? where sups he to-night? Nay, but, my lord,-- What says my sweet queen? My cousin will fall out with you.

You must not know where he sups. I'll lay my life, with my disposer Cressida.

No, no, no such matter, you are wide: come, your disposer is sick.

Why should you say Cressida? no, your poor disposer's sick.

You spy! what do you spy? Come, give me an instrument.

My niece is horribly in love with a thing you have, sweet queen.

She shall have it, my lord, if it be not my lord Paris.

Falling in, after falling out, may make them three.

Come, come, I'll hear no more of this, I'll sing you a song now.

By my troth, sweet lord, thou hast a fine forehead.

O Cupid, Cupid, Cupid! Love! ay, that it shall, i' faith.

Love, love, nothing but love, still more! For, O, love's bow Shoots buck and doe: The shaft confounds, Not that it wounds, But tickles still the sore.

He eats nothing but doves, love, and that breeds hot blood, and hot blood begets hot thoughts, and hot thoughts beget hot deeds, and hot deeds is love.

How chance my brother Troilus went not? He hangs the lip at something: you know all, Lord Pandarus.

A retreat sounded They're come from field: let us to Priam's hall, To greet the warriors.

'Twill make us proud to be his servant, Paris, Yea, what he shall receive of us in duty Gives us more palm in beauty than we have, Yea, overshines ourself.

How now! where's thy master? at my cousin No, sir, he stays for you to conduct him thither.

Have you seen my cousin? No, Pandarus: I stalk about her door, Like a strange soul upon the Stygian banks Staying for waftage.

Re-enter PANDARUS She's making her ready, she'll come straight: you must be witty now.

She does so blush, and fetches her wind so short, as if she were frayed with a sprite: I'll fetch her.

It is the prettiest villain: she fetches her breath as short as a new-ta'en sparrow.

Even such a passion doth embrace my bosom: My heart beats thicker than a feverous pulse, And all my powers do their bestowing lose, Like vassalage at unawares encountering The eye of majesty.

Re-enter PANDARUS with CRESSIDA Come, come, what need you blush? shame's a baby.

Here she is now: swear the oaths now to her that you have sworn to me.

What, are you gone again? you must be watched ere you be made tame, must you? Come your ways, come your ways, an you draw backward, we'll put you i' the fills.

Why do you not speak to her? Come, draw this curtain, and let's see your picture.

Alas the day, how loath you are to offend daylight! an 'twere dark, you'ld close sooner.

How now! a kiss in fee-farm! build there, carpenter, the air is sweet.

Nay, you shall fight your hearts out ere I part you.

The falcon as the tercel, for all the ducks i' the river: go to, go to.

Words pay no debts, give her deeds: but she'll bereave you o' the deeds too, if she call your activity in question.

What, billing again? Here's 'In witness whereof the parties interchangeably'-- Come in, come in: I'll go get a fire.

Fears make devils of cherubims, they never see truly.

Blind fear, that seeing reason leads, finds safer footing than blind reason stumbling without fear: to fear the worst oft cures the worse.

O, let my lady apprehend no fear: in all Cupid's pageant there is presented no monster.

This is the monstruosity in love, lady, that the will is infinite and the execution confined, that the desire is boundless and the act a slave to limit.

Few words to fair faith: Troilus shall be such to Cressid as what envy can say worst shall be a mock for his truth, and what truth can speak truest not truer than Troilus.

Will you walk in, my lord? Re-enter PANDARUS What, blushing still? have you not done talking yet? Well, uncle, what folly I commit, I dedicate to you.

I thank you for that: if my lord get a boy of you, you'll give him me.

Be true to my lord: if he flinch, chide me for it.

You know now your hostages, your uncle's word and my firm faith.

Nay, I'll give my word for her too: our kindred, though they be long ere they are wooed, they are constant being won: they are burs, I can tell you, they'll stick where they are thrown.

Prince Troilus, I have loved you night and day For many weary months.

Why was my Cressid then so hard to win? Hard to seem won: but I was won, my lord, With the first glance that ever--pardon me-- If I confess much, you will play the tyrant.

I love you now, but not, till now, so much But I might master it: in faith, I lie, My thoughts were like unbridled children, grown Too headstrong for their mother.

Sweet, bid me hold my tongue, For in this rapture I shall surely speak The thing I shall repent.

See, see, your silence, Cunning in dumbness, from my weakness draws My very soul of counsel! stop my mouth.

My lord, I do beseech you, pardon me, 'Twas not my purpose, thus to beg a kiss: I am ashamed.

O heavens! what have I done? For this time will I take my leave, my lord.

Your leave, sweet Cressid! Leave! an you take leave till to-morrow morning,-- Pray you, content you.

Let me go and try: I have a kind of self resides with you, But an unkind self, that itself will leave, To be another's fool.

I would be gone: Where is my wit? I know not what I speak.

Well know they what they speak that speak so wisely.

Go to, a bargain made: seal it, seal it, I'll be the witness.

You have a Trojan prisoner, call'd Antenor, Yesterday took: Troy holds him very dear.

Let Diomedes bear him, And bring us Cressid hither: Calchas shall have What he requests of us.

Good Diomed, Furnish you fairly for this interchange: Withal bring word if Hector will to-morrow Be answer'd in his challenge: Ajax is ready.

This shall I undertake, and 'tis a burden Which I am proud to bear.

Achilles stands i' the entrance of his tent: Please it our general to pass strangely by him, As if he were forgot, and, princes all, Lay negligent and loose regard upon him: I will come last.

We'll execute your purpose, and put on A form of strangeness as we pass along: So do each lord, and either greet him not, Or else disdainfully, which shall shake him more Than if not look'd on.

I will lead the way. What, comes the general to speak with me? You know my mind, I'll fight no more 'gainst Troy.

What says Achilles? would he aught with us? Would you, my lord, aught with the general? Nothing, my lord.

How do you? how do you? What, does the cuckold scorn me? How now, Patroclus! Good morrow, Ajax.

What mean these fellows? Know they not Achilles? They pass by strangely: they were used to bend To send their smiles before them to Achilles, To come as humbly as they used to creep To holy altars.

I was much wrapt in this, And apprehended here immediately The unknown Ajax.

Heavens, what a man is there! a very horse, That has he knows not what.

O, let not virtue seek Remuneration for the thing it was, For beauty, wit, High birth, vigour of bone, desert in service, Love, friendship, charity, are subjects all To envious and calumniating time.

Then marvel not, thou great and complete man, That all the Greeks begin to worship Ajax, Since things in motion sooner catch the eye Than what not stirs.

But 'gainst your privacy The reasons are more potent and heroical: 'Tis known, Achilles, that you are in love With one of Priam's daughters.

Farewell, my lord: I as your lover speak, The fool slides o'er the ice that you should break.

To this effect, Achilles, have I moved you: A woman impudent and mannish grown Is not more loathed than an effeminate man In time of action.

Shall Ajax fight with Hector? Ay, and perhaps receive much honour by him.

I see my reputation is at stake My fame is shrewdly gored.

A labour saved! A wonder! Ajax goes up and down the field, asking for himself.

How so? He must fight singly to-morrow with Hector, and is so prophetically proud of an heroical cudgelling that he raves in saying nothing.

The man's undone forever, for if Hector break not his neck i' the combat, he'll break 't himself in vain-glory.

He knows not me: I said 'Good morrow, Ajax,' and he replies 'Thanks, Agamemnon.

What think you of this man that takes me for the general? He's grown a very land-fish, language-less, a monster.

A plague of opinion! a man may wear it on both sides, like a leather jerkin.

Who, I? why, he'll answer nobody, he professes not answering: speaking is for beggars, he wears his tongue in's arms.

I will put on his presence: let Patroclus make demands to me, you shall see the pageant of Ajax.

Do this. Jove bless great Ajax! I come from the worthy Achilles,-- Who most humbly desires you to invite Hector to his tent,-- And to procure safe-conduct from Agamemnon.

What say you to't? God b' wi' you, with all my heart.

If to-morrow be a fair day, by eleven o'clock it will go one way or other: howsoever, he shall pay for me ere he has me.

Why, but he is not in this tune, is he? No, but he's out o' tune thus.

What music will be in him when Hector has knocked out his brains, I know not, but, I am sure, none, unless the fiddler Apollo get his sinews to make catlings on.

Let me bear another to his horse, for that's the more capable creature.

My mind is troubled, like a fountain stirr'd, And I myself see not the bottom of it.

Would the fountain of your mind were clear again, that I might water an ass at it! I had rather be a tick in a sheep than such a valiant ignorance.

See, ho! who is that there? It is the Lord AEneas.

Is the prince there in person? Had I so good occasion to lie long As you, prince Paris, nothing but heavenly business Should rob my bed-mate of my company.

Good morrow, Lord AEneas. A valiant Greek, AEneas,--take his hand,-- Witness the process of your speech, wherein You told how Diomed, a whole week by days, Did haunt you in the field.

Health to you, valiant sir, During all question of the gentle truce, But when I meet you arm'd, as black defiance As heart can think or courage execute.

Our bloods are now in calm, and, so long, health! But when contention and occasion meet, By Jove, I'll play the hunter for thy life With all my force, pursuit and policy.

And thou shalt hunt a lion, that will fly With his face backward.

In humane gentleness, Welcome to Troy! now, by Anchises' life, Welcome, indeed! By Venus' hand I swear, No man alive can love in such a sort The thing he means to kill more excellently.

This is the most despiteful gentle greeting, The noblest hateful love, that e'er I heard of.

What business, lord, so early? I was sent for to the king, but why, I know not.

With the whole quality wherefore: I fear We shall be much unwelcome.

That I assure you: Troilus had rather Troy were borne to Greece Than Cressid borne from Troy.

There is no help, The bitter disposition of the time Will have it so.

Fair Diomed, you do as chapmen do, Dispraise the thing that you desire to buy: But we in silence hold this virtue well, We'll but commend what we intend to sell.

Then, sweet my lord, I'll call mine uncle down, He shall unbolt the gates.

Trouble him not, To bed, to bed: sleep kill those pretty eyes, And give as soft attachment to thy senses As infants' empty of all thought! Good morrow, then.

Are you a-weary of me? O Cressida! but that the busy day, Waked by the lark, hath roused the ribald crows, And dreaming night will hide our joys no longer, I would not from thee.

Beshrew the witch! with venomous wights she stays As tediously as hell, but flies the grasps of love With wings more momentary-swift than thought.

O foolish Cressid! I might have still held off, And then you would have tarried.

To do what? to do what? let her say what: what have I brought you to do? Come, come, beshrew your heart! you'll ne'er be good, Nor suffer others.

My lord, come you again into my chamber: You smile and mock me, as if I meant naughtily.

Ha, ha! Come, you are deceived, I think of no such thing.

Knocking within How earnestly they knock! Pray you, come in: I would not for half Troy have you seen here.

Who's there? what's the matter? will you beat down the door? How now! what's the matter? Good morrow, lord, good morrow.

Is he here, say you? 'tis more than I know, I'll be sworn: for my own part, I came in late.

What should he do here? Who!--nay, then: come, come, you'll do him wrong ere you're ware: you'll be so true to him, to be false to him: do not you know of him, but yet go fetch him hither, go.

Is it so concluded? By Priam and the general state of Troy: They are at hand and ready to effect it.

How my achievements mock me! I will go meet them: and, my Lord AEneas, We met by chance, you did not find me here.

Good, good, my lord, the secrets of nature Have not more gift in taciturnity.

I will not, uncle: I have forgot my father, I know no touch of consanguinity, No kin no love, no blood, no soul so near me As the sweet Troilus.

Tear my bright hair and scratch my praised cheeks, Crack my clear voice with sobs and break my heart With sounding Troilus.

I will not go from Troy. It is great morning, and the hour prefix'd Of her delivery to this valiant Greek Comes fast upon.

Good my brother Troilus, Tell you the lady what she is to do, And haste her to the purpose.

Walk into her house, I'll bring her to the Grecian presently: And to his hand when I deliver her, Think it an altar, and thy brother Troilus A priest there offering to it his own heart.

I know what 'tis to love, And would, as I shall pity, I could help! Please you walk in, my lords.

My love admits no qualifying dross, No more my grief, in such a precious loss.

Ah, sweet ducks! O Troilus! Troilus! Embracing him What a pair of spectacles is here! Let me embrace too.

'O heart,' as the goodly saying is, '--O heart, heavy heart, Why sigh'st thou without breaking? where he answers again, 'Because thou canst not ease thy smart By friendship nor by speaking.

Let us cast away nothing, for we may live to have need of such a verse: we see it, we see it.

Have the gods envy? Ay, ay, ay, ay, 'tis too plain a case.

And is it true that I must go from Troy? A hateful truth.

What, and from Troilus too? From Troy and Troilus.

Hark! you are call'd: some say the Genius so Cries 'come' to him that instantly must die.

Where are my tears? rain, to lay this wind, or my heart will be blown up by the root.

O, you shall be exposed, my lord, to dangers As infinite as imminent! but I'll be true.

When shall I see you? I will corrupt the Grecian sentinels, To give thee nightly visitation.

Do you think I will? But something may be done that we will not: And sometimes we are devils to ourselves, When we will tempt the frailty of our powers, Presuming on their changeful potency.

Good brother, come you hither, And bring AEneas and the Grecian with you.

Fear not my truth: the moral of my wit Is 'plain and true,' there's all the reach of it.

Welcome, Sir Diomed! here is the lady Which for Antenor we deliver you: At the port, lord, I'll give her to thy hand, And by the way possess thee what she is.

Entreat her fair, and, by my soul, fair Greek, If e'er thou stand at mercy of my sword, Name Cressida and thy life shall be as safe As Priam is in Ilion.

I charge thee use her well, even for my charge, For, by the dreadful Pluto, if thou dost not, Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard, I'll cut thy throat.

I'll tell thee, Diomed, This brave shall oft make thee to hide thy head.

Lady, give me your hand, and, as we walk, To our own selves bend we our needful talk.

How have we spent this morning! The prince must think me tardy and remiss, That sore to ride before him to the field.

'Tis Troilus' fault: come, come, to field with him.

Yea, with a bridegroom's fresh alacrity, Let us address to tend on Hector's heels: The glory of our Troy doth this day lie On his fair worth and single chivalry.

Here art thou in appointment fresh and fair, Anticipating time with starting courage.

Give with thy trumpet a loud note to Troy, Thou dreadful Ajax, that the appalled air May pierce the head of the great combatant And hale him hither.

Is not yond Diomed, with Calchas' daughter? 'Tis he, I ken the manner of his gait, He rises on the toe: that spirit of his In aspiration lifts him from the earth.

Yet is the kindness but particular, 'Twere better she were kiss'd in general.

I'll take what winter from your lips, fair lady: Achilles bids you welcome.

But that's no argument for kissing now, For this popp'd Paris in his hardiment, And parted thus you and your argument.

O deadly gall, and theme of all our scorns! For which we lose our heads to gild his horns.

The first was Menelaus' kiss, this, mine: Patroclus kisses you.

O, this is trim! Paris and I kiss evermore for him.

Lady, by your leave. In kissing, do you render or receive? Both take and give.

I'll make my match to live, The kiss you take is better than you give, Therefore no kiss.

No, Paris is not, for you know 'tis true, That you are odd, and he is even with you.

Why then for Venus' sake, give me a kiss, When Helen is a maid again, and his.

Fie, fie upon her! There's language in her eye, her cheek, her lip, Nay, her foot speaks, her wanton spirits look out At every joint and motive of her body.

Which way would Hector have it? He cares not, he'll obey conditions.

'Tis done like Hector, but securely done, A little proudly, and great deal misprizing The knight opposed.

If not Achilles, sir, What is your name? If not Achilles, nothing.

Therefore Achilles: but, whate'er, know this: In the extremity of great and little, Valour and pride excel themselves in Hector, The one almost as infinite as all, The other blank as nothing.

Weigh him well, And that which looks like pride is courtesy.

This Ajax is half made of Hector's blood: In love whereof, half Hector stays at home, Half heart, half hand, half Hector comes to seek This blended knight, half Trojan and half Greek.

AJAX and HECTOR enter the lists They are opposed already.

Thus says AEneas, one that knows the youth Even to his inches, and with private soul Did in great Ilion thus translate him to me.

Now, Ajax, hold thine own! Hector, thou sleep'st, Awake thee! His blows are well disposed: there, Ajax! You must no more.

Not Neoptolemus so mirable, On whose bright crest Fame with her loud'st Oyes Cries 'This is he,' could promise to himself A thought of added honour torn from Hector.

There is expectance here from both the sides, What further you will do.

We'll answer it, The issue is embracement: Ajax, farewell.

If I might in entreaties find success-- As seld I have the chance--I would desire My famous cousin to our Grecian tents.

'Tis Agamemnon's wish, and great Achilles Doth long to see unarm'd the valiant Hector.

AEneas, call my brother Troilus to me, And signify this loving interview To the expecters of our Trojan part, Desire them home.

Give me thy hand, my cousin, I will go eat with thee and see your knights.

The worthiest of them tell me name by name, But for Achilles, mine own searching eyes Shall find him by his large and portly size.

Let me confirm my princely brother's greeting: You brace of warlike brothers, welcome hither.

O, you, my lord? by Mars his gauntlet, thanks! Mock not, that I affect the untraded oath, Your quondam wife swears still by Venus' glove: She's well, but bade me not commend her to you.

I knew thy grandsire, And once fought with him: he was a soldier good, But, by great Mars, the captain of us all, Never saw like thee.

Let an old man embrace thee, And, worthy warrior, welcome to our tents.

Let me embrace thee, good old chronicle, That hast so long walk'd hand in hand with time: Most reverend Nestor, I am glad to clasp thee.

I would my arms could match thee in contention, As they contend with thee in courtesy.

By this white beard, I'ld fight with thee to-morrow.

I wonder now how yonder city stands When we have here her base and pillar by us.

Ah, sir, there's many a Greek and Trojan dead, Since first I saw yourself and Diomed In Ilion, on your Greekish embassy.

Most gentle and most valiant Hector, welcome: After the general, I beseech you next To feast with me and see me at my tent.

I shall forestall thee, Lord Ulysses, thou! Now, Hector, I have fed mine eyes on thee, I have with exact view perused thee, Hector, And quoted joint by joint.

Thou art too brief: I will the second time, As I would buy thee, view thee limb by limb.

O, like a book of sport thou'lt read me o'er, But there's more in me than thou understand'st.

Wert thou an oracle to tell me so, I'd not believe thee.

Henceforth guard thee well, For I'll not kill thee there, nor there, nor there, But, by the forge that stithied Mars his helm, I'll kill thee every where, yea, o'er and o'er.

I pray you, let us see you in the field: We have had pelting wars, since you refused The Grecians' cause.

Dost thou entreat me, Hector? To-morrow do I meet thee, fell as death, To-night all friends.

First, all you peers of Greece, go to my tent, There in the full convive we: afterwards, As Hector's leisure and your bounties shall Concur together, severally entreat him.

Beat loud the tabourines, let the trumpets blow, That this great soldier may his welcome know.

Shall sweet lord, be bound to you so much, After we part from Agamemnon's tent, To bring me thither? You shall command me, sir.

As gentle tell me, of what honour was This Cressida in Troy? Had she no lover there That wails her absence? O, sir, to such as boasting show their scars A mock is due.

Will you walk on, my lord? She was beloved, she loved, she is, and doth: But still sweet love is food for fortune's tooth.

I'll heat his blood with Greekish wine to-night, Which with my scimitar I'll cool to-morrow.

How now, thou core of envy! Thou crusty batch of nature, what's the news? Why, thou picture of what thou seemest, and idol of idiot worshippers, here's a letter for thee.

From whence, fragment? Why, thou full dish of fool, from Troy.

Who keeps the tent now? The surgeon's box, or the patient's wound.

Well said, adversity! and what need these tricks? Prithee, be silent, boy, I profit not by thy talk: thou art thought to be Achilles' male varlet.

Male varlet, you rogue! what's that? Why, his masculine whore.

Here is a letter from Queen Hecuba, A token from her daughter, my fair love, Both taxing me and gaging me to keep An oath that I have sworn.

I will not break it: Fall Greeks, fail fame, honour or go or stay, My major vow lies here, this I'll obey.

Come, come, Thersites, help to trim my tent: This night in banqueting must all be spent.

Away, Patroclus! With too much blood and too little brain, these two may run mad, but, if with too much brain and too little blood they do, I'll be a curer of madmen.

To be a dog, a mule, a cat, a fitchew, a toad, a lizard, an owl, a puttock, or a herring without a roe, I would not care, but to be Menelaus, I would conspire against destiny.

Ask me not, what I would be, if I were not Thersites, for I care not to be the louse of a lazar, so I were not Menelaus! Hey-day! spirits and fires! We go wrong, we go wrong.

Re-enter ACHILLES Welcome, brave Hector, welcome, princes all.

Sweet draught: 'sweet' quoth 'a! sweet sink, sweet sewer.

Good night and welcome, both at once, to those That go or tarry.

Old Nestor tarries, and you too, Diomed, Keep Hector company an hour or two.

I cannot, lord, I have important business, The tide whereof is now.

I will rather leave to see Hector, than not to dog him: they say he keeps a Trojan drab, and uses the traitor Calchas' tent: I'll after.

Nothing but lechery! all incontinent varlets! What, are you up here, ho? speak.

Where's your daughter? Stand where the torch may not discover us.

How now, my charge! Now, my sweet guardian! Hark, a word with you.

Yea, so familiar! She will sing any man at first sight.

And any man may sing her, if he can take her cliff, she's noted.

Nay, but do, then, And let your mind be coupled with your words.

What should she remember? Sweet honey Greek, tempt me no more to folly.

Nay, then,-- I'll tell you what,-- Foh, foh! come, tell a pin: you are forsworn.

In faith, I cannot: what would you have me do? A juggling trick,--to be secretly open.

What did you swear you would bestow on me? I prithee, do not hold me to mine oath, Bid me do any thing but that, sweet Greek.

Hold, patience! How now, Trojan! No, no, good night: I'll be your fool no more.

Behold, I pray you! Nay, good my lord, go off: You flow to great distraction, come, my lord.

I pray you, stay, by hell and all hell's torments I will not speak a word! And so, good night.

Doth that grieve thee? O wither'd truth! Why, how now, lord! By Jove, I will be patient.

Guardian!--why, Greek! Foh, foh! adieu, you palter.

You shake, my lord, at something: will you go? You will break out.

Nay, stay, by Jove, I will not speak a word: There is between my will and all offences A guard of patience: stay a little while.

How the devil Luxury, with his fat rump and potato-finger, tickles these together! Fry, lechery, fry! But will you, then? In faith, I will, la, never trust me else.

Fear me not, sweet lord, I will not be myself, nor have cognition Of what I feel: I am all patience.

Re-enter CRESSIDA Now the pledge, now, now, now! Here, Diomed, keep this sleeve.

O beauty! where is thy faith? My lord,-- I will be patient, outwardly I will.

I will not meet with you to-morrow night: I prithee, Diomed, visit me no more.

Now she sharpens: well said, whetstone! I shall have it.

O, all you gods! O pretty, pretty pledge! Thy master now lies thinking in his bed Of thee and me, and sighs, and takes my glove, And gives memorial dainty kisses to it, As I kiss thee.

Nay, do not snatch it from me, He that takes that doth take my heart withal.

You shall not have it, Diomed, faith, you shall not, I'll give you something else.

Whose was it? By all Diana's waiting-women yond, And by herself, I will not tell you whose.

To-morrow will I wear it on my helm, And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it.

Wert thou the devil, and worest it on thy horn, It should be challenged.

Well, well, 'tis done, 'tis past: and yet it is not, I will not keep my word.

Why, then, farewell, Thou never shalt mock Diomed again.

You shall not go: one cannot speak a word, But it straight starts you.

Nor I, by Pluto: but that that likes not you pleases me best.

What, shall I come? the hour? Ay, come:--O Jove!--do come:--I shall be plagued.

Troilus, farewell! one eye yet looks on thee But with my heart the other eye doth see.

Ah, poor our sex! this fault in us I find, The error of our eye directs our mind: What error leads must err, O, then conclude Minds sway'd by eyes are full of turpitude.

A proof of strength she could not publish more, Unless she said ' My mind is now turn'd whore.

Why stay we, then? To make a recordation to my soul Of every syllable that here was spoke.

What hath she done, prince, that can soil our mothers? Nothing at all, unless that this were she.

O Cressid! O false Cressid! false, false, false! Let all untruths stand by thy stained name, And they'll seem glorious.

O, contain yourself Your passion draws ears hither.

I have been seeking you this hour, my lord: Hector, by this, is arming him in Troy, Ajax, your guard, stays to conduct you home.

My courteous lord, adieu. Farewell, revolted fair! and, Diomed, Stand fast, and wear a castle on thy head! I'll bring you to the gates.

Would I could meet that rogue Diomed! I would croak like a raven, I would bode, I would bode.

Patroclus will give me any thing for the intelligence of this whore: the parrot will not do more for an almond than he for a commodious drab.

You train me to offend you, get you in: By all the everlasting gods, I'll go! My dreams will, sure, prove ominous to the day.

Where is my brother Hector? Here, sister, arm'd, and bloody in intent.

Consort with me in loud and dear petition, Pursue we him on knees, for I have dream'd Of bloody turbulence, and this whole night Hath nothing been but shapes and forms of slaughter.

Ho! bid my trumpet sound! No notes of sally, for the heavens, sweet brother.

The gods are deaf to hot and peevish vows: They are polluted offerings, more abhorr'd Than spotted livers in the sacrifice.

O, be persuaded! do not count it holy To hurt by being just: it is as lawful, For we would give much, to use violent thefts, And rob in the behalf of charity.

It is the purpose that makes strong the vow, But vows to every purpose must not hold: Unarm, sweet Hector.

Hold you still, I say, Mine honour keeps the weather of my fate: Lie every man holds dear, but the brave man Holds honour far more precious-dear than life.

How now, young man! mean'st thou to fight to-day? Cassandra, call my father to persuade.

No, faith, young Troilus, doff thy harness, youth, I am to-day i' the vein of chivalry: Let grow thy sinews till their knots be strong, And tempt not yet the brushes of the war.

Unarm thee, go, and doubt thou not, brave boy, I'll stand to-day for thee and me and Troy.

Brother, you have a vice of mercy in you, Which better fits a lion than a man.

When many times the captive Grecian falls, Even in the fan and wind of your fair sword, You bid them rise, and live.

Re-enter CASSANDRA, with PRIAM Lay hold upon him, Priam, hold him fast: He is thy crutch, now if thou lose thy stay, Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee, Fall all together.

AEneas is a-field, And I do stand engaged to many Greeks, Even in the faith of valour, to appear This morning to them.

You know me dutiful, therefore, dear sir, Let me not shame respect, but give me leave To take that course by your consent and voice, Which you do here forbid me, royal Priam.

Andromache, I am offended with you: Upon the love you bear me, get you in.

This foolish, dreaming, superstitious girl Makes all these bodements.

You are amazed, my liege, at her exclaim: Go in and cheer the town: we'll forth and fight, Do deeds worth praise and tell you them at night.

Farewell: the gods with safety stand about thee! They are at it, hark! Proud Diomed, believe, I come to lose my arm, or win my sleeve.

Do you hear, my lord? do you hear? What now? Here's a letter come from yond poor girl.

What says she there? Words, words, mere words, no matter from the heart: The effect doth operate another way.

Tearing the letter Go, wind, to wind, there turn and change together.

My love with words and errors still she feeds, But edifies another with her deeds.

Enter THERSITES Now they are clapper-clawing one another, I'll go look on.

Fly not, for shouldst thou take the river Styx, I would swim after.

Go, bear Patroclus' body to Achilles, And bid the snail-paced Ajax arm for shame.

Where is this Hector? Come, come, thou boy-queller, show thy face, Know what it is to meet Achilles angry: Hector? where's Hector? I will none but Hector.

Troilus, thou coward Troilus, show thy head! Troilus, I say! where's Troilus? What wouldst thou? I would correct him.

Were I the general, thou shouldst have my office Ere that correction.

Troilus, I say! what, Troilus! O traitor Diomed! turn thy false face, thou traitor, And pay thy life thou owest me for my horse! Ha, art thou there? I'll fight with him alone: stand, Diomed.

Come, both you cogging Greeks, have at you both! Yea, Troilus? O, well fought, my youngest brother! Now do I see thee, ha! have at thee, Hector! Pause, if thou wilt.

I do disdain thy courtesy, proud Trojan: Be happy that my arms are out of use: My rest and negligence befriends thee now, But thou anon shalt hear of me again, Till when, go seek thy fortune.

Fare thee well: I would have been much more a fresher man, Had I expected thee.

Come here about me, you my Myrmidons, Mark what I say.

Attend me where I wheel: Strike not a stroke, but keep yourselves in breath: And when I have the bloody Hector found, Empale him with your weapons round about, In fellest manner execute your aims.

Follow me, sirs, and my proceedings eye: It is decreed Hector the great must die.

Now, bull! now, dog! 'Loo, Paris, 'loo! now my double- henned sparrow! 'loo, Paris, 'loo! The bull has the game: ware horns, ho! Turn, slave, and fight.

I am a bastard too, I love bastards: I am a bastard begot, bastard instructed, bastard in mind, bastard in valour, in every thing illegitimate.

One bear will not bite another, and wherefore should one bastard? Take heed, the quarrel's most ominous to us: if the son of a whore fight for a whore, he tempts judgment: farewell, bastard.

The devil take thee, coward! Most putrefied core, so fair without, Thy goodly armour thus hath cost thy life.

Now is my day's work done, I'll take good breath: Rest, sword, thou hast thy fill of blood and death.

HECTOR falls So, Ilion, fall thou next! now, Troy, sink down! Here lies thy heart, thy sinews, and thy bone.

On, Myrmidons, and cry you all amain, 'Achilles hath the mighty Hector slain.

A retreat sounded Hark! a retire upon our Grecian part.

The dragon wing of night o'erspreads the earth, And, stickler-like, the armies separates.

My half-supp'd sword, that frankly would have fed, Pleased with this dainty bait, thus goes to bed.

Sheathes his sword Come, tie his body to my horse's tail, Along the field I will the Trojan trail.

Hark! hark! what shout is that? Peace, drums! Achilles! Achilles! Hector's slain! Achilles.

If it be so, yet bragless let it be, Great Hector was a man as good as he.

March patiently along: let one be sent To pray Achilles see us at our tent.

If in his death the gods have us befriended, Great Troy is ours, and our sharp wars are ended.

Stand, ho! yet are we masters of the field: Never go home, here starve we out the night.

Hector! the gods forbid! He's dead, and at the murderer's horse's tail, In beastly sort, dragg'd through the shameful field.

But, march away: Hector is dead, there is no more to say.

Strike a free march to Troy! with comfort go: Hope of revenge shall hide our inward woe.

Good traders in the flesh, set this in your painted cloths.

As many as be here of pander's hall, Your eyes, half out, weep out at Pandar's fall, Or if you cannot weep, yet give some groans, Though not for me, yet for your aching bones.

If music be the food of love, play on, Give me excess of it, that, surfeiting, The appetite may sicken, and so die.

What country, friends, is this? This is Illyria, lady.

And what should I do in Illyria? My brother he is in Elysium.

Perchance he is not drown'd: what think you, sailors? It is perchance that you yourself were saved.

For saying so, there's gold: Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope, Whereto thy speech serves for authority, The like of him.

Know'st thou this country? Ay, madam, well, for I was bred and born Not three hours' travel from this very place.

Who governs here? A noble duke, in nature as in name.

What is the name? Orsino! I have heard my father name him: He was a bachelor then.

I prithee, and I'll pay thee bounteously, Conceal me what I am, and be my aid For such disguise as haply shall become The form of my intent.

I'll serve this duke: Thou shall present me as an eunuch to him: It may be worth thy pains, for I can sing And speak to him in many sorts of music That will allow me very worth his service.

What else may hap to time I will commit, Only shape thou thy silence to my wit.

Be you his eunuch, and your mute I'll be: When my tongue blabs, then let mine eyes not see.

What a plague means my niece, to take the death of her brother thus? I am sure care's an enemy to life.

By my troth, Sir Toby, you must come in earlier o' nights: your cousin, my lady, takes great exceptions to your ill hours.

Ay, but you must confine yourself within the modest limits of order.

Confine! I'll confine myself no finer than I am: these clothes are good enough to drink in, and so be these boots too: an they be not, let them hang themselves in their own straps.

That quaffing and drinking will undo you: I heard my lady talk of it yesterday, and of a foolish knight that you brought in one night here to be her wooer.

What's that to the purpose? Why, he has three thousand ducats a year.

Ay, but he'll have but a year in all these ducats: he's a very fool and a prodigal.

Fie, that you'll say so! he plays o' the viol-de-gamboys, and speaks three or four languages word for word without book, and hath all the good gifts of nature.

By this hand, they are scoundrels and subtractors that say so of him.

Who are they? They that add, moreover, he's drunk nightly in your company.

What, wench! Castiliano vulgo! for here comes Sir Andrew Agueface.

Sir Toby Belch! how now, Sir Toby Belch! Sweet Sir Andrew! Bless you, fair shrew.

Good Mistress Accost, I desire better acquaintance.

Good Mistress Mary Accost,-- You mistake, knight, 'accost' is front her, board her, woo her, assail her.

By my troth, I would not undertake her in this company.

Is that the meaning of 'accost'? Fare you well, gentlemen.

An thou let part so, Sir Andrew, would thou mightst never draw sword again.

An you part so, mistress, I would I might never draw sword again.

Fair lady, do you think you have fools in hand? Sir, I have not you by the hand.

Now, sir, 'thought is free:' I pray you, bring your hand to the buttery-bar and let it drink.

Wherefore, sweet-heart? what's your metaphor? It's dry, sir.

Why, I think so: I am not such an ass but I can keep my hand dry.

Are you full of them? Ay, sir, I have them at my fingers' ends: marry, now I let go your hand, I am barren.

O knight thou lackest a cup of canary: when did I see thee so put down? Never in your life, I think, unless you see canary put me down.

Methinks sometimes I have no more wit than a Christian or an ordinary man has: but I am a great eater of beef and I believe that does harm to my wit.

Why, would that have mended my hair? Past question, for thou seest it will not curl by nature.

But it becomes me well enough, does't not? Excellent, it hangs like flax on a distaff, and I hope to see a housewife take thee between her legs and spin it off.

Faith, I'll home to-morrow, Sir Toby: your niece will not be seen, or if she be, it's four to one she'll none of me: the count himself here hard by woos her.

She'll none o' the count: she'll not match above her degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit, I have heard her swear't.

I am a fellow o' the strangest mind i' the world, I delight in masques and revels sometimes altogether.

Art thou good at these kickshawses, knight? As any man in Illyria, whatsoever he be, under the degree of my betters, and yet I will not compare with an old man.

What is thy excellence in a galliard, knight? Faith, I can cut a caper.

And I think I have the back-trick simply as strong as any man in Illyria.

What dost thou mean? Is it a world to hide virtues in? I did think, by the excellent constitution of thy leg, it was formed under the star of a galliard.

Ay, 'tis strong, and it does indifferent well in a flame-coloured stock.

Shall we set about some revels? What shall we do else? were we not born under Taurus? Taurus! That's sides and heart.

You either fear his humour or my negligence, that you call in question the continuance of his love: is he inconstant, sir, in his favours? No, believe me.

Here comes the count. Who saw Cesario, ho? On your attendance, my lord, here.

Sure, my noble lord, If she be so abandon'd to her sorrow As it is spoke, she never will admit me.

Be clamorous and leap all civil bounds Rather than make unprofited return.

I know thy constellation is right apt For this affair.

Some four or five attend him, All, if you will, for I myself am best When least in company.

Prosper well in this, And thou shalt live as freely as thy lord, To call his fortunes thine.

I'll do my best To woo your lady: yet, a barful strife! Whoe'er I woo, myself would be his wife.

Nay, either tell me where thou hast been, or I will not open my lips so wide as a bristle may enter in way of thy excuse: my lady will hang thee for thy absence.

Let her hang me: he that is well hanged in this world needs to fear no colours.

A good lenten answer: I can tell thee where that saying was born, of 'I fear no colours.

Where, good Mistress Mary? In the wars, and that may you be bold to say in your foolery.

Well, God give them wisdom that have it, and those that are fools, let them use their talents.

You are resolute, then? Not so, neither, but I am resolved on two points.

That if one break, the other will hold, or, if both break, your gaskins fall.

Well, go thy way, if Sir Toby would leave drinking, thou wert as witty a piece of Eve's flesh as any in Illyria.

Here comes my lady: make your excuse wisely, you were best.

Go to, you're a dry fool, I'll no more of you: besides, you grow dishonest.

Any thing that's mended is but patched: virtue that transgresses is but patched with sin, and sin that amends is but patched with virtue.

If that this simple syllogism will serve, so, if it will not, what remedy? As there is no true cuckold but calamity, so beauty's a flower.

The lady bade take away the fool, therefore, I say again, take her away.

Misprision in the highest degree! Lady, cucullus non facit monachum, that's as much to say as I wear not motley in my brain.

I must catechise you for it, madonna: good my mouse of virtue, answer me.

Well, sir, for want of other idleness, I'll bide your proof.

Good madonna, why mournest thou? Good fool, for my brother's death.

The more fool, madonna, to mourn for your brother's soul being in heaven.

God send you, sir, a speedy infirmity, for the better increasing your folly! Sir Toby will be sworn that I am no fox, but he will not pass his word for two pence that you are no fool.

How say you to that, Malvolio? I marvel your ladyship takes delight in such a barren rascal: I saw him put down the other day with an ordinary fool that has no more brain than a stone.

Look you now, he's out of his guard already, unless you laugh and minister occasion to him, he is gagged.

I protest, I take these wise men, that crow so at these set kind of fools, no better than the fools' zanies.

Oh, you are sick of self-love, Malvolio, and taste with a distempered appetite.

Now Mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou speakest well of fools! Re-enter MARIA Madam, there is at the gate a young gentleman much desires to speak with you.

From the Count Orsino, is it? I know not, madam: 'tis a fair young man, and well attended.

Who of my people hold him in delay? Sir Toby, madam, your kinsman.

Fetch him off, I pray you, he speaks nothing but madman: fie on him! Go you, Malvolio: if it be a suit from the count, I am sick, or not at home, what you will, to dismiss it.

Now you see, sir, how your fooling grows old, and people dislike it.

Thou hast spoke for us, madonna, as if thy eldest son should be a fool, whose skull Jove cram with brains! for,--here he comes,--one of thy kin has a most weak pia mater.

There's one at the gate. Ay, marry, what is he? Let him be the devil, an he will, I care not: give me faith, say I.

Well, it's all one. What's a drunken man like, fool? Like a drowned man, a fool and a mad man: one draught above heat makes him a fool, the second mads him, and a third drowns him.

Go thou and seek the crowner, and let him sit o' my coz, for he's in the third degree of drink, he's drowned: go, look after him.

He is but mad yet, madonna, and the fool shall look to the madman.

Re-enter MALVOLIO Madam, yond young fellow swears he will speak with you.

I told him you were sick, he takes on him to understand so much, and therefore comes to speak with you.

I told him you were asleep, he seems to have a foreknowledge of that too, and therefore comes to speak with you.

What is to be said to him, lady? he's fortified against any denial.

Has been told so, and he says, he'll stand at your door like a sheriff's post, and be the supporter to a bench, but he'll speak with you.

What manner of man? Of very ill manner, he'll speak with you, will you or no.

He is very well-favoured and he speaks very shrewishly, one would think his mother's milk were scarce out of him.

Re-enter MARIA Give me my veil: come, throw it o'er my face.

The honourable lady of the house, which is she? Speak to me, I shall answer for her.

Good beauties, let me sustain no scorn, I am very comptible, even to the least sinister usage.

Whence came you, sir? I can say little more than I have studied, and that question's out of my part.

Good gentle one, give me modest assurance if you be the lady of the house, that I may proceed in my speech.

Are you a comedian? No, my profound heart: and yet, by the very fangs of malice I swear, I am not that I play.

Are you the lady of the house? If I do not usurp myself, I am.

Most certain, if you are she, you do usurp yourself, for what is yours to bestow is not yours to reserve.

But this is from my commission: I will on with my speech in your praise, and then show you the heart of my message.

Come to what is important in't: I forgive you the praise.

Alas, I took great pains to study it, and 'tis poetical.

It is the more like to be feigned: I pray you, keep it in.

I heard you were saucy at my gates, and allowed your approach rather to wonder at you than to hear you.

If you be not mad, be gone, if you have reason, be brief: 'tis not that time of moon with me to make one in so skipping a dialogue.

No, good swabber, I am to hull here a little longer.

Tell me your mind: I am a messenger. Sure, you have some hideous matter to deliver, when the courtesy of it is so fearful.

I bring no overture of war, no taxation of homage: I hold the olive in my hand, my words are as fun of peace as matter.

What are you? what would you? The rudeness that hath appeared in me have I learned from my entertainment.

What I am, and what I would, are as secret as maidenhead, to your ears, divinity, to any other's, profanation.

Give us the place alone: we will hear this divinity.

Now, sir, what is your text? Most sweet lady,-- A comfortable doctrine, and much may be said of it.

In his bosom! In what chapter of his bosom? To answer by the method, in the first of his heart.

Have you no more to say? Good madam, let me see your face.

Have you any commission from your lord to negotiate with my face? You are now out of your text: but we will draw the curtain and show you the picture.

Look you, sir, such a one I was this present: is't not well done? Excellently done, if God did all.

'Tis in grain, sir, 'twill endure wind and weather.

'Tis beauty truly blent, whose red and white Nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on: Lady, you are the cruell'st she alive, If you will lead these graces to the grave And leave the world no copy.

Were you sent hither to praise me? I see you what you are, you are too proud, But, if you were the devil, you are fair.

If I did love you in my master's flame, With such a suffering, such a deadly life, In your denial I would find no sense, I would not understand it.

What is your parentage? Above my fortunes, yet my state is well: I am a gentleman.

Get you to your lord, I cannot love him: let him send no more, Unless, perchance, you come to me again, To tell me how he takes it.

Fare you well: I thank you for your pains: spend this for me.

I am no fee'd post, lady, keep your purse: My master, not myself, lacks recompense.

Love make his heart of flint that you shall love, And let your fervor, like my master's, be Placed in contempt! Farewell, fair cruelty.

'What is your parentage?' 'Above my fortunes, yet my state is well: I am a gentleman.

I'll be sworn thou art, Thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions and spirit, Do give thee five-fold blazon: not too fast: soft, soft! Unless the master were the man.

How now! Even so quickly may one catch the plague? Methinks I feel this youth's perfections With an invisible and subtle stealth To creep in at mine eyes.

Well, let it be. What ho, Malvolio! Re-enter MALVOLIO Here, madam, at your service.

Run after that same peevish messenger, The county's man: he left this ring behind him, Would I or not: tell him I'll none of it.

Desire him not to flatter with his lord, Nor hold him up with hopes, I am not for him: If that the youth will come this way to-morrow, I'll give him reasons for't: hie thee, Malvolio.

I do I know not what, and fear to find Mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind.

Fate, show thy force: ourselves we do not owe, What is decreed must be, and be this so.

Will you stay no longer? nor will you not that I go with you? By your patience, no.

ANTONIO: Let me yet know of you whither you are bound.

No, sooth, sir: my determinate voyage is mere extravagancy.

But I perceive in you so excellent a touch of modesty, that you will not extort from me what I am willing to keep in, therefore it charges me in manners the rather to express myself.

You must know of me then, Antonio, my name is Sebastian, which I called Roderigo.

My father was that Sebastian of Messaline, whom I know you have heard of.

She is drowned already, sir, with salt water, though I seem to drown her remembrance again with more.

If you will not murder me for my love, let me be your servant.

If you will not undo what you have done, that is, kill him whom you have recovered, desire it not.

Fare ye well at once: my bosom is full of kindness, and I am yet so near the manners of my mother, that upon the least occasion more mine eyes will tell tales of me.

I am bound to the Count Orsino's court: farewell. The gentleness of all the gods go with thee! I have many enemies in Orsino's court, Else would I very shortly see thee there.

But, come what may, I do adore thee so, That danger shall seem sport, and I will go.

Were not you even now with the Countess Olivia? Even now, sir, on a moderate pace I have since arrived but hither.

She returns this ring to you, sir: you might have saved me my pains, to have taken it away yourself.

Receive it so. She took the ring of me: I'll none of it.

Come, sir, you peevishly threw it to her, and her will is, it should be so returned: if it be worth stooping for, there it lies in your eye, if not, be it his that finds it.

She loves me, sure, the cunning of her passion Invites me in this churlish messenger.

I am the man: if it be so, as 'tis, Poor lady, she were better love a dream.

Disguise, I see, thou art a wickedness, Wherein the pregnant enemy does much.

How easy is it for the proper-false In women's waxen hearts to set their forms! Alas, our frailty is the cause, not we! For such as we are made of, such we be.

How will this fadge? my master loves her dearly, And I, poor monster, fond as much on him, And she, mistaken, seems to dote on me.

To be up after midnight and to go to bed then, is early: so that to go to bed after midnight is to go to bed betimes.

Does not our life consist of the four elements? Faith, so they say, but I think it rather consists of eating and drinking.

Thou'rt a scholar, let us therefore eat and drink.

Marian, I say! a stoup of wine! Here comes the fool, i' faith.

How now, my hearts! did you never see the picture of 'we three'? Welcome, ass.

Now let's have a catch. By my troth, the fool has an excellent breast.

I had rather than forty shillings I had such a leg, and so sweet a breath to sing, as the fool has.

In sooth, thou wast in very gracious fooling last night, when thou spokest of Pigrogromitus, of the Vapians passing the equinoctial of Queubus: 'twas very good, i' faith.

I sent thee sixpence for thy leman: hadst it? I did impeticos thy gratillity, for Malvolio's nose is no whipstock: my lady has a white hand, and the Myrmidons are no bottle-ale houses.

Excellent! why, this is the best fooling, when all is done.

Now, a song. Come on, there is sixpence for you: let's have a song.

There's a testril of me too: if one knight give a-- Would you have a love-song, or a song of good life? A love-song, a love-song.

But shall we make the welkin dance indeed? shall we rouse the night-owl in a catch that will draw three souls out of one weaver? shall we do that? An you love me, let's do't: I am dog at a catch.

Let our catch be, 'Thou knave.' 'Hold thy peace, thou knave,' knight? I shall be constrained in't to call thee knave, knight.

'Tis not the first time I have constrained one to call me knave.

Begin, fool: it begins 'Hold thy peace.' I shall never begin if I hold my peace.

Come, begin. Catch sung What a caterwauling do you keep here! If my lady have not called up her steward Malvolio and bid him turn you out of doors, never trust me.

My lady's a Cataian, we are politicians, Malvolio's a Peg-a-Ramsey, and 'Three merry men be we.

Am not I consanguineous? am I not of her blood? Tillyvally.

Lady! 'There dwelt a man in Babylon, lady, lady!' Beshrew me, the knight's in admirable fooling.

Ay, he does well enough if he be disposed, and so do I too: he does it with a better grace, but I do it more natural.

My lady bade me tell you, that, though she harbours you as her kinsman, she's nothing allied to your disorders.

If you can separate yourself and your misdemeanors, you are welcome to the house, if not, an it would please you to take leave of her, she is very willing to bid you farewell.

'Farewell, dear heart, since I must needs be gone.

'Shall I bid him go?' 'What an if you do?' 'Shall I bid him go, and spare not?' 'O no, no, no, no, you dare not.

Art any more than a steward? Dost thou think, because thou art virtuous, there shall be no more cakes and ale? Yes, by Saint Anne, and ginger shall be hot i' the mouth too.

A stoup of wine, Maria! Mistress Mary, if you prized my lady's favour at any thing more than contempt, you would not give means for this uncivil rule: she shall know of it, by this hand.

'Twere as good a deed as to drink when a man's a-hungry, to challenge him the field, and then to break promise with him and make a fool of him.

Do't, knight: I'll write thee a challenge: or I'll deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth.

Sweet Sir Toby, be patient for tonight: since the youth of the count's was today with thy lady, she is much out of quiet.

For Monsieur Malvolio, let me alone with him: if I do not gull him into a nayword, and make him a common recreation, do not think I have wit enough to lie straight in my bed: I know I can do it.

O, if I thought that I'ld beat him like a dog! What, for being a puritan? thy exquisite reason, dear knight? I have no exquisite reason for't, but I have reason good enough.

I can write very like my lady your niece: on a forgotten matter we can hardly make distinction of our hands.

He shall think, by the letters that thou wilt drop, that they come from my niece, and that she's in love with him.

O, 'twill be admirable! Sport royal, I warrant you: I know my physic will work with him.

I will plant you two, and let the fool make a third, where he shall find the letter: observe his construction of it.

She's a beagle, true-bred, and one that adores me: what o' that? I was adored once too.

If I cannot recover your niece, I am a foul way out.

Send for money, knight: if thou hast her not i' the end, call me cut.

If I do not, never trust me, take it how you will.

Come, come, I'll go burn some sack, 'tis too late to go to bed now: come, knight, come, knight.

He is not here, so please your lordship that should sing it.

Who was it? Feste, the jester, my lord, a fool that the lady Olivia's father took much delight in.

He is about the house. Seek him out, and play the tune the while.

How dost thou like this tune? It gives a very echo to the seat Where Love is throned.

Thou dost speak masterly: My life upon't, young though thou art, thine eye Hath stay'd upon some favour that it loves: Hath it not, boy? A little, by your favour.

Then let thy love be younger than thyself, Or thy affection cannot hold the bent, For women are as roses, whose fair flower Being once display'd, doth fall that very hour.

And so they are: alas, that they are so, To die, even when they to perfection grow! Re-enter CURIO and Clown O, fellow, come, the song we had last night.

Come away, come away, death, And in sad cypress let me be laid, Fly away, fly away breath, I am slain by a fair cruel maid.

My shroud of white, stuck all with yew, O, prepare it! My part of death, no one so true Did share it.

Truly, sir, and pleasure will be paid, one time or another.

Now, the melancholy god protect thee, and the tailor make thy doublet of changeable taffeta, for thy mind is a very opal.

I would have men of such constancy put to sea, that their business might be every thing and their intent every where, for that's it that always makes a good voyage of nothing.

But if she cannot love you, sir? I cannot be so answer'd.

Ay, but I know-- What dost thou know? Too well what love women to men may owe: In faith, they are as true of heart as we.

My father had a daughter loved a man, As it might be, perhaps, were I a woman, I should your lordship.

Was not this love indeed? We men may say more, swear more: but indeed Our shows are more than will, for still we prove Much in our vows, but little in our love.

But died thy sister of her love, my boy? I am all the daughters of my father's house, And all the brothers too: and yet I know not.

To her in haste, give her this jewel, say, My love can give no place, bide no denay.

Nay, I'll come: if I lose a scruple of this sport, let me be boiled to death with melancholy.

Wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascally sheep-biter come by some notable shame? I would exult, man: you know, he brought me out o' favour with my lady about a bear-baiting here.

To anger him we'll have the bear again, and we will fool him black and blue: shall we not, Sir Andrew? An we do not, it is pity of our lives.

Close, in the name of jesting! Lie thou there, Throws down a letter for here comes the trout that must be caught with tickling.

Maria once told me she did affect me: and I have heard herself come thus near, that, should she fancy, it should be one of my complexion.

Besides, she uses me with a more exalted respect than any one else that follows her.

What should I think on't? Here's an overweening rogue! O, peace! Contemplation makes a rare turkey-cock of him: how he jets under his advanced plumes! 'Slight, I could so beat the rogue! Peace, I say.

To be Count Malvolio! Ah, rogue! Pistol him, pistol him.

Peace, peace! There is example for't, the lady of the Strachy married the yeoman of the wardrobe.

Fie on him, Jezebel! O, peace! now he's deeply in: look how imagination blows him.

Seven of my people, with an obedient start, make out for him: I frown the while, and perchance wind up watch, or play with my--some rich jewel.

Toby approaches, courtesies there to me,-- Shall this fellow live? Though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.

Out, scab! Nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot.

'Besides, you waste the treasure of your time with a foolish knight,'-- That's me, I warrant you.

'One Sir Andrew,'-- I knew 'twas I, for many do call me fool.

What employment have we here? Taking up the letter Now is the woodcock near the gin.

O, peace! and the spirit of humour intimate reading aloud to him! By my life, this is my lady's hand these be her very C's, her U's and her T's and thus makes she her great P's.

It is, in contempt of question, her hand. Her C's, her U's and her T's: why that? wishes:'--her very phrases! By your leave, wax.

Soft! and the impressure her Lucrece, with which she uses to seal: 'tis my lady.

To whom should this be? This wins him, liver and all.

Jove knows I love: But who? Lips, do not move, No man must know.

Nay, but first, let me see, let me see, let me see.

What dish o' poison has she dressed him! And with what wing the staniel cheques at it! 'I may command where I adore.

Why, she may command me: I serve her, she is my lady.

Sowter will cry upon't for all this, though it be as rank as a fox.

Did not I say he would work it out? the cur is excellent at faults.

M,--but then there is no consonancy in the sequel, that suffers under probation A should follow but O does.

Ay, or I'll cudgel him, and make him cry O! And then I comes behind.

In my stars I am above thee, but be not afraid of greatness: some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon 'em.

Thy Fates open their hands, let thy blood and spirit embrace them, and, to inure thyself to what thou art like to be, cast thy humble slough and appear fresh.

Be opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants, let thy tongue tang arguments of state, put thyself into the trick of singularity: she thus advises thee that sighs for thee.

Remember who commended thy yellow stockings, and wished to see thee ever cross-gartered: I say, remember.

Go to, thou art made, if thou desirest to be so, if not, let me see thee a steward still, the fellow of servants, and not worthy to touch Fortune's fingers.

Farewell. She that would alter services with thee, THE FORTUNATE-UNHAPPY.

Daylight and champaign discovers not more: this is open.

I will be proud, I will read politic authors, I will baffle Sir Toby, I will wash off gross acquaintance, I will be point-devise the very man.

I do not now fool myself, to let imagination jade me, for every reason excites to this, that my lady loves me.

I thank my stars I am happy. I will be strange, stout, in yellow stockings, and cross-gartered, even with the swiftness of putting on.

Jove and my stars be praised! Here is yet a 'Thou canst not choose but know who I am.

If thou entertainest my love, let it appear in thy smiling, thy smiles become thee well, therefore in my presence still smile, dear my sweet, I prithee.

Jove, I thank thee: I will smile, I will do everything that thou wilt have me.

I will not give my part of this sport for a pension of thousands to be paid from the Sophy.

And ask no other dowry with her but such another jest.

Nay, but say true, does it work upon him? Like aqua-vitae with a midwife.

If you will see it, follow To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit! I'll make one too.

Save thee, friend, and thy music: dost thou live by thy tabour? No, sir, I live by the church.

Art thou a churchman? No such matter, sir: I do live by the church, for I do live at my house, and my house doth stand by the church.

So thou mayst say, the king lies by a beggar, if a beggar dwell near him, or, the church stands by thy tabour, if thy tabour stand by the church.

I would, therefore, my sister had had no name, sir.

Why, man? Why, sir, her name's a word, and to dally with that word might make my sister wanton.

But indeed words are very rascals since bonds disgraced them.

Thy reason, man? Troth, sir, I can yield you none without words, and words are grown so false, I am loath to prove reason with them.

I warrant thou art a merry fellow and carest for nothing.

Not so, sir, I do care for something, but in my conscience, sir, I do not care for you: if that be to care for nothing, sir, I would it would make you invisible.

Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun, it shines every where.

I would be sorry, sir, but the fool should be as oft with your master as with my mistress: I think I saw your wisdom there.

Nay, an thou pass upon me, I'll no more with thee.

Now Jove, in his next commodity of hair, send thee a beard! By my troth, I'll tell thee, I am almost sick for though I would not have it grow on my chin.

Is thy lady within? Would not a pair of these have bred, sir? Yes, being kept together and put to use.

I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia, sir, to bring a Cressida to this Troilus.

The matter, I hope, is not great, sir, begging but a beggar: Cressida was a beggar.

I will construe to them whence you come, who you are and what you would are out of my welkin, I might say 'element,' but the word is over-worn.

This is a practise As full of labour as a wise man's art For folly that he wisely shows is fit, But wise men, folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.

Will you encounter the house? my niece is desirous you should enter, if your trade be to her.

I am bound to your niece, sir, I mean, she is the list of my voyage.

My legs do better understand me, sir, than I understand what you mean by bidding me taste my legs.

Most excellent accomplished lady, the heavens rain odours on you! That youth's a rare courtier: 'Rain odours,' well.

My matter hath no voice, to your own most pregnant and vouchsafed ear.

'Odours,' 'pregnant' and 'vouchsafed:' I'll get 'em all three all ready.

Let the garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing.

What is your name? Cesario is your servant's name, fair princess.

My servant, sir! 'Twas never merry world Since lowly feigning was call'd compliment: You're servant to the Count Orsino, youth.

And he is yours, and his must needs be yours: Your servant's servant is your servant, madam.

For him, I think not on him: for his thoughts, Would they were blanks, rather than fill'd with me! Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughts On his behalf.

O, by your leave, I pray you, I bade you never speak again of him: But, would you undertake another suit, I had rather hear you to solicit that Than music from the spheres.

No, not a grize, for 'tis a vulgar proof, That very oft we pity enemies.

O, world, how apt the poor are to be proud! If one should be a prey, how much the better To fall before the lion than the wolf! Clock strikes The clock upbraids me with the waste of time.

Be not afraid, good youth, I will not have you: And yet, when wit and youth is come to harvest, Your were is alike to reap a proper man: There lies your way, due west.

Then westward-ho! Grace and good disposition Attend your ladyship! You'll nothing, madam, to my lord by me? I prithee, tell me what thou thinkest of me.

I would you were as I would have you be! Would it be better, madam, than I am? I wish it might, for now I am your fool.

O, what a deal of scorn looks beautiful In the contempt and anger of his lip! A murderous guilt shows not itself more soon Than love that would seem hid: love's night is noon.

Cesario, by the roses of the spring, By maidhood, honour, truth and every thing, I love thee so, that, maugre all thy pride, Nor wit nor reason can my passion hide.

Do not extort thy reasons from this clause, For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause, But rather reason thus with reason fetter, Love sought is good, but given unsought better.

By innocence I swear, and by my youth I have one heart, one bosom and one truth, And that no woman has, nor never none Shall mistress be of it, save I alone.

And so adieu, good madam: never more Will I my master's tears to you deplore.

Yet come again, for thou perhaps mayst move That heart, which now abhors, to like his love.

Marry, I saw your niece do more favours to the count's serving-man than ever she bestowed upon me, I saw't i' the orchard.

Did she see thee the while, old boy? tell me that.

This was a great argument of love in her toward you.

'Slight, will you make an ass o' me? I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of judgment and reason.

And they have been grand-jury-men since before Noah was a sailor.

She did show favour to the youth in your sight only to exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valour, to put fire in your heart and brimstone in your liver.

You should then have accosted her, and with some excellent jests, fire-new from the mint, you should have banged the youth into dumbness.

An't be any way, it must be with valour, for policy I hate: I had as lief be a Brownist as a Why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis of valour.

Let there be gall enough in thy ink, though thou write with a goose-pen, no matter: about it.

Where shall I find you? We'll call thee at the cubiculo: go.

I have been dear to him, lad, some two thousand strong, or so.

We shall have a rare letter from him: but you'll not deliver't? Never trust me, then, and by all means stir on the youth to an answer.

I think oxen and wainropes cannot hale them together.

For Andrew, if he were opened, and you find so much blood in his liver as will clog the foot of a flea, I'll eat the rest of the anatomy.

And his opposite, the youth, bears in his visage no great presage of cruelty.

If you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourself into stitches, follow me.

Yond gull Malvolio is turned heathen, a very renegado, for there is no Christian, that means to be saved by believing rightly, can ever believe such impossible passages of grossness.

He's in yellow stockings. And cross-gartered? Most villanously, like a pedant that keeps a school i' the church.

I know my lady will strike him: if she do, he'll smile and take't for a great favour.

I would not by my will have troubled you, But, since you make your pleasure of your pains, I will no further chide you.

What's to do? Shall we go see the reliques of this town? To-morrow, sir: best first go see your lodging.

I am not weary, and 'tis long to night: I pray you, let us satisfy our eyes With the memorials and the things of fame That do renown this city.

The offence is not of such a bloody nature, Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel Might well have given us bloody argument.

It might have since been answer'd in repaying What we took from them, which, for traffic's sake, Most of our city did: only myself stood out, For which, if I be lapsed in this place, I shall pay dear.

Why I your purse? Haply your eye shall light upon some toy You have desire to purchase, and your store, I think, is not for idle markets, sir.

I'll be your purse-bearer and leave you For an hour.

I have sent after him: he says he'll come, How shall I feast him? what bestow of him? For youth is bought more oft than begg'd or borrow'd.

Where is Malvolio? he is sad and civil, And suits well for a servant with my fortunes: Where is Malvolio? He's coming, madam, but in very strange manner.

madam, he does nothing but smile: your ladyship were best to have some guard about you, if he come, for, sure, the man is tainted in's wits.

I am as mad as he, If sad and merry madness equal be.

Re-enter MARIA, with MALVOLIO How now, Malvolio! Sweet lady, ho, ho.

Smilest thou? I sent for thee upon a sad occasion.

Why, how dost thou, man? what is the matter with thee? Not black in my mind, though yellow in my legs.

It did come to his hands, and commands shall be executed: I think we do know the sweet Roman hand.

Wilt thou go to bed, Malvolio? To bed! ay, sweet-heart, and I'll come to thee.

God comfort thee! Why dost thou smile so and kiss thy hand so oft? How do you, Malvolio? At your request! yes, nightingales answer daws.

Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my lady? 'Be not afraid of greatness:' 'twas well writ.

What meanest thou by that, Malvolio? 'Some are born great,'-- 'Some achieve greatness,'-- What sayest thou? 'And some have greatness thrust upon them.

Heaven restore thee! 'Remember who commended thy yellow stocking s,'-- Thy yellow stockings! 'And wished to see thee cross-gartered.

'Go to thou art made, if thou desirest to be so,'-- Am I made? 'If not, let me see thee a servant still.

Madam, the young gentleman of the Count Orsino's is returned: I could hardly entreat him back: he attends your ladyship's pleasure.

Where's my cousin Toby? Let some of my people have a special care of him: I would not have him miscarry for the half of my dowry.

I have limed her, but it is Jove's doing, and Jove make me thankful! And when she went away now, 'Let this fellow be looked to:' fellow! not Malvolio, nor after my degree, but fellow.

Well, Jove, not I, is the doer of this, and he is to be thanked.

Re-enter MARIA, with SIR TOBY BELCH and FABIAN Which way is he, in the name of sanctity? If all the devils of hell be drawn in little, and Legion himself possessed him, yet I'll speak to him.

Ah, ha! does she so? Go to, go to, peace, peace, we must deal gently with him: let me alone.

How do you, Malvolio? how is't with you? What, man! defy the devil: consider, he's an enemy to mankind.

Do you know what you say? La you, an you speak ill of the devil, how he takes it at heart! Pray God, he be not bewitched! Carry his water to the wise woman.

Marry, and it shall be done to-morrow morning, if I live.

My lady would not lose him for more than I'll say. How now, mistress! O Lord! Prithee, hold thy peace, this is not the way: do you not see you move him? let me alone with him.

No way but gentleness, gently, gently: the fiend is rough, and will not be roughly used.

Why, how now, my bawcock! how dost thou, chuck? Ay, Biddy, come with me.

What, man! 'tis not for gravity to play at cherry-pit with Satan: hang him, foul collier! Get him to say his prayers, good Sir Toby, get him to pray.

My prayers, minx! No, I warrant you, he will not hear of godliness.

Go, hang yourselves all! you are idle shallow things: I am not of your element: you shall know more hereafter.

Is't possible? If this were played upon a stage now, I could condemn it as an improbable fiction.

His very genius hath taken the infection of the device, man.

Nay, pursue him now, lest the device take air and taint.

Here's the challenge, read it: warrant there's vinegar and pepper in't.

Is't so saucy? Ay, is't, I warrant him: do but read.

'Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art but a scurvy fellow.

why I do call thee so, for I will show thee no reason for't.

A good note, that keeps you from the blow of the law.

sight she uses thee kindly: but thou liest in thy throat, that is not the matter I challenge thee for.

be thy chance to kill me,'-- Still you keep o' the windy side of the law: good.

one of our souls! He may have mercy upon mine, but my hope is better, and so look to thyself.

Thy friend, as thou usest him, and thy sworn enemy, ANDREW AGUECHEEK.

If this letter move him not, his legs cannot: I'll give't him.

You may have very fit occasion for't: he is now in some commerce with my lady, and will by and by depart.

This will so fright them both that they will kill one another by the look, like cockatrices.

Re-enter OLIVIA, with VIOLA Here he comes with your niece: give them way till he take leave, and presently after him.

I will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a challenge.

I have said too much unto a heart of stone And laid mine honour too unchary out: There's something in me that reproves my fault, But such a headstrong potent fault it is, That it but mocks reproof.

With the same 'havior that your passion bears Goes on my master's grief.

Here, wear this jewel for me, 'tis my picture, Refuse it not, it hath no tongue to vex you, And I beseech you come again to-morrow.

What shall you ask of me that I'll deny, That honour saved may upon asking give? Nothing but this, your true love for my master.

How with mine honour may I give him that Which I have given to you? I will acquit you.

Well, come again to-morrow: fare thee well: A fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.

Re-enter SIR TOBY BELCH and FABIAN Gentleman, God save thee.

You mistake, sir, I am sure no man hath any quarrel to me: my remembrance is very free and clear from any image of offence done to any man.

Hob, nob, is his word, give't or take't. I will return again into the house and desire some conduct of the lady.

I am no fighter. I have heard of some kind of men that put quarrels purposely on others, to taste their valour: belike this is a man of that quirk.

Sir, no, his indignation derives itself out of a very competent injury: therefore, get you on and give him his desire.

I beseech you, do me this courteous office, as to know of the knight what my offence to him is: it is something of my negligence, nothing of my purpose.

Signior Fabian, stay you by this gentleman till my return.

Pray you, sir, do you know of this matter? I know the knight is incensed against you, even to a mortal arbitrement, but nothing of the circumstance more.

I beseech you, what manner of man is he? Nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him by his form, as you are like to find him in the proof of his valour.

He is, indeed, sir, the most skilful, bloody and fatal opposite that you could possibly have found in any part of Illyria.

Re-enter SIR TOBY BELCH, with SIR ANDREW Why, man, he's a very devil, I have not seen such a firago.

They say he has been fencer to the Sophy. Pox on't, I'll not meddle with him.

Ay, but he will not now be pacified: Fabian can scarce hold him yonder.

Plague on't, an I thought he had been valiant and so cunning in fence, I'ld have seen him damned ere I'ld have challenged him.

Let him let the matter slip, and I'll give him my horse, grey Capilet.

I'll make the motion: stand here, make a good show on't: this shall end without the perdition of souls.

Marry, I'll ride your horse as well as I ride you.

Re-enter FABIAN and VIOLA To FABIAN I have his horse to take up the quarrel: I have persuaded him the youth's a devil.

He is as horribly conceited of him, and pants and looks pale, as if a bear were at his heels.

Come on, to't. Pray God, he keep his oath! I do assure you, 'tis against my will.

If this young gentleman Have done offence, I take the fault on me: If you offend him, I for him defy you.

You, sir! why, what are you? One, sir, that for his love dares yet do more Than you have heard him brag to you he will.

They draw O good Sir Toby, hold! here come the officers.

Marry, will I, sir, and, for that I promised you, I'll be as good as my word: he will bear you easily and reins well.

Antonio, I arrest thee at the suit of Count Orsino.

No, sir, no jot, I know your favour well, Though now you have no sea-cap on your head.

To VIOLA This comes with seeking you: But there's no remedy, I shall answer it.

What will you do, now my necessity Makes me to ask you for my purse? It grieves me Much more for what I cannot do for you Than what befalls myself.

This youth that you see here I snatch'd one half out of the jaws of death, Relieved him with such sanctity of love, And to his image, which methought did promise Most venerable worth, did I devotion.

What's that to us? The time goes by: away! But O how vile an idol proves this god Thou hast, Sebastian, done good feature shame.

In nature there's no blemish but the mind, None can be call'd deform'd but the unkind: Virtue is beauty, but the beauteous evil Are empty trunks o'erflourish'd by the devil.

The man grows mad: away with him! Come, come, sir.

Methinks his words do from such passion fly, That he believes himself: so do not I.

Prove true, imagination, O, prove true, That I, dear brother, be now ta'en for you! Come hither, knight, come hither, Fabian: we'll whisper o'er a couplet or two of most sage saws.

A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward than a hare: his dishonesty appears in leaving his friend here in necessity and denying him, and for his cowardship, ask Fabian.

Will you make me believe that I am not sent for you? Go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow: Let me be clear of thee.

Well held out, i' faith! No, I do not know you, nor I am not sent to you by my lady, to bid you come speak with her, nor your name is not Master Cesario, nor this is not my nose neither.

Nothing that is so is so. I prithee, vent thy folly somewhere else: Thou know'st not me.

Vent my folly! he has heard that word of some great man and now applies it to a fool.

Vent my folly! I am afraid this great lubber, the world, will prove a cockney.

These wise men that give fools money get themselves a good report--after fourteen years' purchase.

Are all the people mad? Hold, sir, or I'll throw your dagger o'er the house.

This will I tell my lady straight: I would not be in some of your coats for two pence.

Nay, let him alone: I'll go another way to work with him, I'll have an action of battery against him, if there be any law in Illyria: though I struck him first, yet it's no matter for that.

Come, my young soldier, put up your iron: you are well fleshed, come on.

What wouldst thou now? If thou darest tempt me further, draw thy sword.

What, what? Nay, then I must have an ounce or two of this malapert blood from you.

Rudesby, be gone! I prithee, gentle friend, Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion, sway In this uncivil and thou unjust extent Against thy peace.

Go with me to my house, And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks This ruffian hath botch'd up, that thou thereby Mayst smile at this: thou shalt not choose but go: Do not deny.

Beshrew his soul for me, He started one poor heart of mine in thee.

O, say so, and so be! Nay, I prithee, put on this gown and this beard, make him believe thou art Sir Topas the curate: do it quickly, I'll call Sir Toby the whilst.

Well, I'll put it on, and I will dissemble myself in't, and I would I were the first that ever dissembled in such a gown.

The competitors enter. Jove bless thee, master Parson.

What, ho, I say! peace in this prison! The knave counterfeits well, a good knave.

Sir Topas the curate, who comes to visit Malvolio the lunatic.

Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, go to my lady.

Out, hyperbolical fiend! how vexest thou this man! talkest thou nothing but of ladies? Well said, Master Parson.

Sir Topas, never was man thus wronged: good Sir Topas, do not think I am mad: they have laid me here in hideous darkness.

Fie, thou dishonest Satan! I call thee by the most modest terms, for I am one of those gentle ones that will use the devil himself with courtesy: sayest thou that house is dark? As hell, Sir Topas.

Madman, thou errest: I say, there is no darkness but ignorance, in which thou art more puzzled than the Egyptians in their fog.

I say, this house is as dark as ignorance, though ignorance were as dark as hell, and I say, there was never man thus abused.

I am no more mad than you are: make the trial of it in any constant question.

What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning wild fowl? That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.

What thinkest thou of his opinion? I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his opinion.

Remain thou still in darkness: thou shalt hold the opinion of Pythagoras ere I will allow of thy wits, and fear to kill a woodcock, lest thou dispossess the soul of thy grandam.

Fare thee well. Sir Topas, Sir Topas! My most exquisite Sir Topas! Nay, I am for all waters.

Thou mightst have done this without thy beard and gown: he sees thee not.

To him in thine own voice, and bring me word how thou findest him: I would we were well rid of this knavery.

If he may be conveniently delivered, I would he were, for I am now so far in offence with my niece that I cannot pursue with any safety this sport to the upshot.

Come by and by to my chamber. 'Hey, Robin, jolly Robin, Tell me how thy lady does.

Alas, sir, how fell you besides your five wits? Fool, there was never a man so notoriously abused: I am as well in my wits, fool, as thou art.

But as well? then you are mad indeed, if you be no better in your wits than a fool.

They have here propertied me, keep me in darkness, send ministers to me, asses, and do all they can to face me out of my wits.

Malvolio, Malvolio, thy wits the heavens restore! endeavour thyself to sleep, and leave thy vain bibble babble.

Sir Topas! Maintain no words with him, good fellow.

I will, sir, I will. Fool, fool, fool, I say! Alas, sir, be patient.

Good fool, help me to some light and some paper: I tell thee, I am as well in my wits as any man in Illyria.

Good fool, some ink, paper and light, and convey what I will set down to my lady: it shall advantage thee more than ever the bearing of letter did.

But tell me true, are you not mad indeed? or do you but counterfeit? Believe me, I am not, I tell thee true.

Nay, I'll ne'er believe a madman till I see his brains.

I will fetch you light and paper and ink. Fool, I'll requite it in the highest degree: I prithee, be gone.

This is the air, that is the glorious sun, This pearl she gave me, I do feel't and see't, And though 'tis wonder that enwraps me thus, Yet 'tis not madness.

Where's Antonio, then? I could not find him at the Elephant: Yet there he was, and there I found this credit, That he did range the town to seek me out.

But here the lady comes. Blame not this haste of mine.

He shall conceal it Whiles you are willing it shall come to note, What time we will our celebration keep According to my birth.

What do you say? I'll follow this good man, and go with you, And, having sworn truth, ever will be true.

Then lead the way, good father, and heavens so shine, That they may fairly note this act of mine! Now, as thou lovest me, let me see his letter.

This is, to give a dog, and in recompense desire my dog again.

Belong you to the Lady Olivia, friends? Ay, sir, we are some of her trappings.

I know thee well, how dost thou, my good fellow? Truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse for my friends.

By my troth, sir, no, though it please you to be one of my friends.

But that it would be double-dealing, sir, I would you could make it another.

Put your grace in your pocket, sir, for this once, and let your flesh and blood obey it.

Well, I will be so much a sinner, to be a double-dealer: there's another.

You can fool no more money out of me at this throw: if you will let your lady know I am here to speak with her, and bring her along with you, it may awake my bounty further.

Marry, sir, lullaby to your bounty till I come again.

I go, sir, but I would not have you to think that my desire of having is the sin of covetousness: but, as you say, sir, let your bounty take a nap, I will awake it anon.

He did me kindness, sir, drew on my side, But in conclusion put strange speech upon me: I know not what 'twas but distraction.

How can this be? When came he to this town? To-day, my lord, and for three months before, No interim, not a minute's vacancy, Both day and night did we keep company.

Here comes the countess: now heaven walks on earth.

But for thee, fellow, fellow, thy words are madness: Three months this youth hath tended upon me, But more of that anon.

Take him aside. What would my lord, but that he may not have, Wherein Olivia may seem serviceable? Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.

Gracious Olivia,-- What do you say, Cesario? Good my lord,-- My lord would speak, my duty hushes me.

If it be aught to the old tune, my lord, It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear As howling after music.

Why should I not, had I the heart to do it, Like to the Egyptian thief at point of death, Kill what I love?--a savage jealousy That sometimes savours nobly.

Come, boy, with me, my thoughts are ripe in mischief: I'll sacrifice the lamb that I do love, To spite a raven's heart within a dove.

And I, most jocund, apt and willingly, To do you rest, a thousand deaths would die.

Where goes Cesario? After him I love More than I love these eyes, more than my life, More, by all mores, than e'er I shall love wife.

Come, away! Whither, my lord? Cesario, husband, stay.

Ay, husband: can he that deny? Her husband, sirrah! No, my lord, not I.

Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear That makes thee strangle thy propriety: Fear not, Cesario, take thy fortunes up, Be that thou know'st thou art, and then thou art As great as that thou fear'st.

My lord, I do protest-- O, do not swear! Hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear.

For the love of God, a surgeon! Send one presently to Sir Toby.

What's the matter? He has broke my head across and has given Sir Toby a bloody coxcomb too: for the love of God, your help! I had rather than forty pound I were at home.

Who has done this, Sir Andrew? The count's gentleman, one Cesario: we took him for a coward, but he's the very devil incardinate.

My gentleman, Cesario? 'Od's lifelings, here he is! You broke my head for nothing, and that that I did, I was set on to do't by Sir Toby.

Why do you speak to me? I never hurt you: You drew your sword upon me without cause, But I bespoke you fair, and hurt you not.

If a bloody coxcomb be a hurt, you have hurt me: I think you set nothing by a bloody coxcomb.

Here comes Sir Toby halting, you shall hear more: but if he had not been in drink, he would have tickled you othergates than he did.

How now, gentleman! how is't with you? That's all one: has hurt me, and there's the end on't.

Sot, didst see Dick surgeon, sot? O, he's drunk, Sir Toby, an hour agone, his eyes were set at eight i' the morning.

Then he's a rogue, and a passy measures panyn: I hate a drunken rogue.

Away with him! Who hath made this havoc with them? I'll help you, Sir Toby, because well be dressed together.

Will you help? an ass-head and a coxcomb and a knave, a thin-faced knave, a gull! Get him to bed, and let his hurt be look'd to.

I am sorry, madam, I have hurt your kinsman: But, had it been the brother of my blood, I must have done no less with wit and safety.

You throw a strange regard upon me, and by that I do perceive it hath offended you: Pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows We made each other but so late ago.

Which is Sebastian? Most wonderful! Do I stand there? I never had a brother, Nor can there be that deity in my nature, Of here and every where.

I had a sister, Whom the blind waves and surges have devour'd.

A spirit I am indeed, But am in that dimension grossly clad Which from the womb I did participate.

Were you a woman, as the rest goes even, I should my tears let fall upon your cheek, And say 'Thrice-welcome, drowned Viola!' My father had a mole upon his brow.

And died that day when Viola from her birth Had number'd thirteen years.

O, that record is lively in my soul! He finished indeed his mortal act That day that made my sister thirteen years.

All the occurrence of my fortune since Hath been between this lady and this lord.

You would have been contracted to a maid, Nor are you therein, by my life, deceived, You are betroth'd both to a maid and man.

If this be so, as yet the glass seems true, I shall have share in this most happy wreck.

To VIOLA Boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times Thou never shouldst love woman like to me.

And all those sayings will I overswear, And those swearings keep as true in soul As doth that orbed continent the fire That severs day from night.

Give me thy hand, And let me see thee in thy woman's weeds.

The captain that did bring me first on shore Hath my maid's garments: he upon some action Is now in durance, at Malvolio's suit, A gentleman, and follower of my lady's.

He shall enlarge him: fetch Malvolio hither: And yet, alas, now I remember me, They say, poor gentleman, he's much distract.

Re-enter Clown with a letter, and FABIAN A most extracting frenzy of mine own From my remembrance clearly banish'd his.

Look then to be well edified when the fool delivers the madman.

'By the Lord, madam,'-- How now! art thou mad? No, madam, I do but read madness: an your ladyship will have it as it ought to be, you must allow Vox.

So I do, madonna, but to read his right wits is to read thus: therefore perpend, my princess, and give ear.

To FABIAN world shall know it: though you have put me into darkness and given your drunken cousin rule over me, yet have I the benefit of my senses as well as your ladyship.

I have your own letter that induced me to the semblance I put on, with the which I doubt not but to do myself much right, or you much shame.

I leave my duty a little unthought of and speak out of my injury.

My lord so please you, these things further thought on, To think me as well a sister as a wife, One day shall crown the alliance on't, so please you, Here at my house and at my proper cost.

Re-enter FABIAN, with MALVOLIO Is this the madman? Ay, my lord, this same.

How now, Malvolio! Madam, you have done me wrong, Notorious wrong.

Alas, Malvolio, this is not my writing, Though, I confess, much like the character But out of question 'tis Maria's hand.

And now I do bethink me, it was she First told me thou wast mad, then camest in smiling, And in such forms which here were presupposed Upon thee in the letter.

Prithee, be content: This practise hath most shrewdly pass'd upon thee, But when we know the grounds and authors of it, Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge Of thine own cause.

Good madam, hear me speak, And let no quarrel nor no brawl to come Taint the condition of this present hour, Which I have wonder'd at.

How with a sportful malice it was follow'd, May rather pluck on laughter than revenge, If that the injuries be justly weigh'd That have on both sides pass'd.

Alas, poor fool, how have they baffled thee! Why, 'some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrown upon them.

I was one, sir, in this interlude, one Sir Topas, sir, but that's all one.

'By the Lord, fool, I am not mad.' But do you remember? 'Madam, why laugh you at such a barren rascal? an you smile not, he's gagged:' and thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges.

Pursue him and entreat him to a peace: He hath not told us of the captain yet: When that is known and golden time convents, A solemn combination shall be made Of our dear souls.

Meantime, sweet sister, We will not part from hence.

Cesario, come, For so you shall be, while you are a man, But when in other habits you are seen, Orsino's mistress and his fancy's queen.

When that I was and a little tiny boy, With hey, ho, the wind and the rain, A foolish thing was but a toy, For the rain it raineth every day.

But when I came to man's estate, With hey, ho,  and c.

'Gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate, For the rain,  and c.

But when I came, alas! to wive, With hey, ho,  and c.

By swaggering could I never thrive, For the rain,  and c.

But when I came unto my beds, With hey, ho,  and c.

With toss-pots still had drunken heads, For the rain,  and c.

A great while ago the world begun, With hey, ho,  and c.

But that's all one, our play is done, And we'll strive to please you every day.

Cease to persuade, my loving Proteus: Home-keeping youth have ever homely wits.

But since thou lovest, love still and thrive therein, Even as I would when I to love begin.

And on a love-book pray for my success? Upon some book I love I'll pray for thee.

That's on some shallow story of deep love: How young Leander cross'd the Hellespont.

That's a deep story of a deeper love: For he was more than over shoes in love.

'Tis true, for you are over boots in love, And yet you never swum the Hellespont.

Love is your master, for he masters you: And he that is so yoked by a fool, Methinks, should not be chronicled for wise.

Yet writers say, as in the sweetest bud The eating canker dwells, so eating love Inhabits in the finest wits of all.

But wherefore waste I time to counsel thee, That art a votary to fond desire? Once more adieu! my father at the road Expects my coming, there to see me shipp'd.

To Milan let me hear from thee by letters Of thy success in love, and what news else Betideth here in absence of thy friend, And likewise will visit thee with mine.

All happiness bechance to thee in Milan! As much to you at home! and so, farewell.

He after honour hunts, I after love: He leaves his friends to dignify them more, I leave myself, my friends and all, for love.

Thou, Julia, thou hast metamorphosed me, Made me neglect my studies, lose my time, War with good counsel, set the world at nought, Made wit with musing weak, heart sick with thought.

Sir Proteus, save you! Saw you my master? But now he parted hence, to embark for Milan.

Twenty to one then he is shipp'd already, And I have play'd the sheep in losing him.

Indeed, a sheep doth very often stray, An if the shepherd be a while away.

You conclude that my master is a shepherd, then, and I a sheep? I do.

Why then, my horns are his horns, whether I wake or sleep.

The shepherd seeks the sheep, and not the sheep the shepherd, but I seek my master, and my master seeks not me: therefore I am no sheep.

The sheep for fodder follow the shepherd, the shepherd for food follows not the sheep: thou for wages followest thy master, thy master for wages follows not thee: therefore thou art a sheep.

But, dost thou hear? gavest thou my letter to Julia? Ay sir: I, a lost mutton, gave your letter to her, a laced mutton, and she, a laced mutton, gave me, a lost mutton, nothing for my labour.

Here's too small a pasture for such store of muttons.

If the ground be overcharged, you were best stick her.

Nay: in that you are astray, 'twere best pound you.

Nay, sir, less than a pound shall serve me for carrying your letter.

From a pound to a pin? fold it over and over, 'Tis threefold too little for carrying a letter to your lover.

You mistook, sir, I say, she did nod: and you ask me if she did nod, and I say, 'Ay.

Now you have taken the pains to set it together, take it for your pains.

Why sir, how do you bear with me? Marry, sir, the letter, very orderly, having nothing but the word 'noddy' for my pains.

Come come, open the matter in brief: what said she? Open your purse, that the money and the matter may be both at once delivered.

What said she? Truly, sir, I think you'll hardly win her.

Give her no token but stones, for she's as hard as steel.

What said she? nothing? No, not so much as 'Take this for thy pains.

To testify your bounty, I thank you, you have testerned me, in requital whereof, henceforth carry your letters yourself: and so, sir, I'll commend you to my master.

Go, go, be gone, to save your ship from wreck, Which cannot perish having thee aboard, Being destined to a drier death on shore.

I must go send some better messenger: I fear my Julia would not deign my lines, Receiving them from such a worthless post.

But say, Lucetta, now we are alone, Wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love? Ay, madam, so you stumble not unheedfully.

What think'st thou of the fair Sir Eglamour? As of a knight well-spoken, neat and fine, But, were I you, he never should be mine.

What think'st thou of the rich Mercatio? Well of his wealth, but of himself, so so.

Why not on Proteus, as of all the rest? Then thus: of many good I think him best.

Your reason? I have no other, but a woman's reason, I think him so because I think him so.

And wouldst thou have me cast my love on him? Ay, if you thought your love not cast away.

Say, say, who gave it thee? Valentine's page, and sent, I think, from Proteus.

He would have given it you, but I, being in the way, Did in your name receive it: pardon the fault I pray.

And yet I would I had o'erlooked the letter: It were a shame to call her back again And pray her to a fault for which I chid her.

What a fool is she, that knows I am a maid, And would not force the letter to my view! Since maids, in modesty, say 'no' to that Which they would have the profferer construe 'ay.

What ho! Lucetta! Re-enter LUCETTA What would your ladyship? Is't near dinner-time? I would it were, That you might kill your stomach on your meat And not upon your maid.

What is't that you took up so gingerly? Why didst thou stoop, then? To take a paper up that I let fall.

Madam, it will not lie where it concerns Unless it have a false interpeter.

Heavy! belike it hath some burden then? Ay, and melodious were it, would you sing it.

How now, minion! Keep tune there still, so you will sing it out: And yet methinks I do not like this tune.

Nay, now you are too flat And mar the concord with too harsh a descant: There wanteth but a mean to fill your song.

Here is a coil with protestation! Tears the letter Go get you gone, and let the papers lie: You would be fingering them, to anger me.

She makes it strange, but she would be best pleased To be so anger'd with another letter.

Unkind Julia! As in revenge of thy ingratitude, I throw thy name against the bruising stones, Trampling contemptuously on thy disdain.

Poor wounded name! my bosom as a bed Shall lodge thee till thy wound be thoroughly heal'd, And thus I search it with a sovereign kiss.

And yet I will not, sith so prettily He couples it to his complaining names.

Thus will I fold them one on another: Now kiss, embrace, contend, do what you will.

Re-enter LUCETTA Dinner is ready, and your father stays.

What, shall these papers lie like tell-tales here? If you respect them, best to take them up.

Nay, I was taken up for laying them down: Yet here they shall not lie, for catching cold.

Ay, madam, you may say what sights you see, I see things too, although you judge I wink.

Come, come, will't please you go? Tell me, Panthino, what sad talk was that Wherewith my brother held you in the cloister? 'Twas of his nephew Proteus, your son.

Nor need'st thou much importune me to that Whereon this month I have been hammering.

I have consider'd well his loss of time And how he cannot be a perfect man, Not being tried and tutor'd in the world: Experience is by industry achieved And perfected by the swift course of time.

Then tell me, whither were I best to send him? I think your lordship is not ignorant How his companion, youthful Valentine, Attends the emperor in his royal court.

'Twere good, I think, your lordship sent him thither: There shall he practise tilts and tournaments, Hear sweet discourse, converse with noblemen.

And be in eye of every exercise Worthy his youth and nobleness of birth.

I like thy counsel, well hast thou advised: And that thou mayst perceive how well I like it, The execution of it shall make known.

Even with the speediest expedition I will dispatch him to the emperor's court.

To-morrow, may it please you, Don Alphonso, With other gentlemen of good esteem, Are journeying to salute the emperor And to commend their service to his will.

Good company, with them shall Proteus go: And, in good time! now will we break with him.

Sweet love! sweet lines! sweet life! Here is her hand, the agent of her heart, Here is her oath for love, her honour's pawn.

There is no news, my lord, but that he writes How happily he lives, how well beloved And daily graced by the emperor, Wishing me with him, partner of his fortune.

And how stand you affected to his wish? As one relying on your lordship's will And not depending on his friendly wish.

Muse not that I thus suddenly proceed, For what I will, I will, and there an end.

I am resolved that thou shalt spend some time With Valentinus in the emperor's court: What maintenance he from his friends receives, Like exhibition thou shalt have from me.

To-morrow be in readiness to go: Excuse it not, for I am peremptory.

My lord, I cannot be so soon provided: Please you, deliberate a day or two.

Look, what thou want'st shall be sent after thee: No more of stay! to-morrow thou must go.

Come on, Panthino: you shall be employ'd To hasten on his expedition.

Thus have I shunn'd the fire for fear of burning, And drench'd me in the sea, where I am drown'd.

I fear'd to show my father Julia's letter, Lest he should take exceptions to my love, And with the vantage of mine own excuse Hath he excepted most against my love.

Why, this it is: my heart accords thereto, And yet a thousand times it answers 'no.

Why, then, this may be yours, for this is but one.

Ha! let me see: ay, give it me, it's mine: Sweet ornament that decks a thing divine! Ah, Silvia, Silvia! Madam Silvia! Madam Silvia! How now, sirrah? She is not within hearing, sir.

Why, sir, who bade you call her? Your worship, sir, or else I mistook.

Are all these things perceived in me? They are all perceived without ye.

But tell me, dost thou know my lady Silvia? She that you gaze on so as she sits at supper? Hast thou observed that? even she, I mean.

Dost thou know her by my gazing on her, and yet knowest her not? Is she not hard-favoured, sir? Not so fair, boy, as well-favoured.

What dost thou know? That she is not so fair as, of you, well-favoured.

I mean that her beauty is exquisite, but her favour infinite.

That's because the one is painted and the other out of all count.

How painted? and how out of count? Marry, sir, so painted, to make her fair, that no man counts of her beauty.

How long hath she been deformed? Ever since you loved her.

I have loved her ever since I saw her, and still I see her beautiful.

Belike, boy, then, you are in love, for last morning you could not see to wipe my shoes.

True, sir, I was in love with my bed: I thank you, you swinged me for my love, which makes me the bolder to chide you for yours.

I would you were set, so your affection would cease.

Last night she enjoined me to write some lines to one she loves.

Are they not lamely writ? No, boy, but as well as I can do them.

As you enjoin'd me, I have writ your letter Unto the secret nameless friend of yours, Which I was much unwilling to proceed in But for my duty to your ladyship.

I thank you gentle servant: 'tis very clerkly done.

Now trust me, madam, it came hardly off, For being ignorant to whom it goes I writ at random, very doubtfully.

What means your ladyship? do you not like it? Yes, yes, the lines are very quaintly writ, But since unwillingly, take them again.

Ay, ay: you writ them, sir, at my request, But I will none of them, they are for you, I would have had them writ more movingly.

And when it's writ, for my sake read it over, And if it please you, so, if not, why, so.

If it please me, madam, what then? Why, if it please you, take it for your labour: And so, good morrow, servant.

O jest unseen, inscrutable, invisible, As a nose on a man's face, or a weathercock on a steeple! My master sues to her, and she hath taught her suitor, He being her pupil, to become her tutor.

To whom? To yourself: why, she wooes you by a figure.

Why, she hath not writ to me? What need she, when she hath made you write to yourself? Why, do you not perceive the jest? No, believe me.

But did you perceive her earnest? She gave me none, except an angry word.

And that letter hath she delivered, and there an end.

All this I speak in print, for in print I found it.

Ay, but hearken, sir, though the chameleon Love can feed on the air, I am one that am nourished by my victuals, and would fain have meat.

Giving a ring Why then, we'll make exchange, here, take you this.

Julia, farewell! What, gone without a word? Ay, so true love should do: it cannot speak, For truth hath better deeds than words to grace it.

Nay, 'twill be this hour ere I have done weeping, all the kind of the Launces have this very fault.

I have received my proportion, like the prodigious son, and am going with Sir Proteus to the Imperial's court.

Now come I to my father, Father, your blessing: now should not the shoe speak a word for weeping: now should I kiss my father, well, he weeps on.

Now come I to my mother: O, that she could speak now like a wood woman! Well, I kiss her, why, there 'tis, here's my mother's breath up and down.

Now the dog all this while sheds not a tear nor speaks a word, but see how I lay the dust with my tears.

Launce, away, away, aboard! thy master is shipped and thou art to post after with oars.

What's the matter? why weepest thou, man? Away, ass! You'll lose the tide, if you tarry any longer.

It is no matter if the tied were lost, for it is the unkindest tied that ever any man tied.

What's the unkindest tide? Why, he that's tied here, Crab, my dog.

What seem I that I am not? What instance of the contrary? Your folly.

And how quote you my folly? I quote it in your jerkin.

What, angry, Sir Thurio! do you change colour? Give him leave, madam, he is a kind of chameleon.

That hath more mind to feed on your blood than live in your air.

I know it well, sir, you always end ere you begin.

A fine volley of words, gentlemen, and quickly shot off.

Who is that, servant? Yourself, sweet lady, for you gave the fire.

Sir Thurio borrows his wit from your ladyship's looks, and spends what he borrows kindly in your company.

Sir, if you spend word for word with me, I shall make your wit bankrupt.

I know it well, sir, you have an exchequer of words, and, I think, no other treasure to give your followers, for it appears by their bare liveries, that they live by your bare words.

No more, gentlemen, no more:--here comes my father.

Sir Valentine, your father's in good health: What say you to a letter from your friends Of much good news? My lord, I will be thankful.

Know ye Don Antonio, your countryman? Ay, my good lord, I know the gentleman To be of worth and worthy estimation And not without desert so well reputed.

Hath he not a son? Ay, my good lord, a son that well deserves The honour and regard of such a father.

Beshrew me, sir, but if he make this good, He is as worthy for an empress' love As meet to be an emperor's counsellor.

Well, sir, this gentleman is come to me, With commendation from great potentates, And here he means to spend his time awhile: I think 'tis no unwelcome news to you.

Silvia, I speak to you, and you, Sir Thurio, For Valentine, I need not cite him to it: I will send him hither to you presently.

This is the gentleman I told your ladyship Had come along with me, but that his mistress Did hold his eyes lock'd in her crystal looks.

Belike that now she hath enfranchised them Upon some other pawn for fealty.

Nay, sure, I think she holds them prisoners still.

Nay, then he should be blind, and, being blind How could he see his way to seek out you? Why, lady, Love hath twenty pair of eyes.

To see such lovers, Thurio, as yourself: Upon a homely object Love can wink.

Welcome, dear Proteus! Mistress, I beseech you, Confirm his welcome with some special favour.

His worth is warrant for his welcome hither, If this be he you oft have wish'd to hear from.

Mistress, it is: sweet lady, entertain him To be my fellow-servant to your ladyship.

Not so, sweet  lady: but too mean a servant To have a look of such a worthy mistress.

Leave off discourse of disability: Sweet lady, entertain him for your servant.

And duty never yet did want his meed: Servant, you are welcome to a worthless mistress.

Re-enter THURIO Madam, my lord your father would speak with you.

Once more, new servant, welcome: I'll leave you to confer of home affairs, When you have done, we look to hear from you.

Now, tell me, how do all from whence you came? Your friends are well and have them much commended.

How does your lady? and how thrives your love? My tales of love were wont to weary you, I know you joy not in a love discourse.

O gentle Proteus, Love's a mighty lord, And hath so humbled me, as, I confess, There is no woe to his correction, Nor to his service no such joy on earth.

Now no discourse, except it be of love, Now can I break my fast, dine, sup and sleep, Upon the very naked name of love.

Was this the idol that you worship so? Even she, and is she not a heavenly saint? No, but she is an earthly paragon.

When I was sick, you gave me bitter pills, And I must minister the like to you.

Then speak the truth by her, if not divine, Yet let her be a principality, Sovereign to all the creatures on the earth.

Sweet, except not any, Except thou wilt except against my love.

Why, Valentine, what braggardism is this? Pardon me, Proteus: all I can is nothing To her whose worth makes other worthies nothing, She is alone.

Not for the world: why, man, she is mine own, And I as rich in having such a jewel As twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl, The water nectar and the rocks pure gold.

Forgive me that I do not dream on thee, Because thou see'st me dote upon my love.

My foolish rival, that her father likes Only for his possessions are so huge, Is gone with her along, and I must after, For love, thou know'st, is full of jealousy.

Good Proteus, go with me to my chamber, In these affairs to aid me with thy counsel.

Go on before, I shall inquire you forth: I must unto the road, to disembark Some necessaries that I needs must use, And then I'll presently attend you.

Even as one heat another heat expels, Or as one nail by strength drives out another, So the remembrance of my former love Is by a newer object quite forgotten.

Methinks my zeal to Valentine is cold, And that I love him not as I was wont.

O, but I love his lady too too much, And that's the reason I love him so little.

If I can cheque my erring love, I will, If not, to compass her I'll use my skill.

Launce! by mine honesty, welcome to Milan! Forswear not thyself, sweet youth, for I am not welcome.

But, sirrah, how did thy master part with Madam Julia? Marry, after they closed in earnest, they parted very fairly in jest.

But shall she marry him? How then? shall he marry her? No, neither.

What, are they broken? No, they are both as whole as a fish.

Why, then, how stands the matter with them? Marry, thus: when it stands well with him, it stands well with her.

What a block art thou, that thou canst not! My staff understands me.

What thou sayest? Ay, and what I do too: look thee, I'll but lean, and my staff understands me.

But tell me true, will't be a match? Ask my dog: if he say ay, it will! if he say no, it will, if he shake his tail and say nothing, it will.

Thou shalt never get such a secret from me but by a parable.

But, Launce, how sayest thou, that my master is become a notable lover? I never knew him otherwise.

Than how? A notable lubber, as thou reportest him to be.

Why, I tell thee, I care not though he burn himself in love.

If thou wilt, go with me to the alehouse, if not, thou art an Hebrew, a Jew, and not worth the name of a Christian.

Because thou hast not so much charity in thee as to go to the ale with a Christian.

O sweet-suggesting Love, if thou hast sinned, Teach me, thy tempted subject, to excuse it! At first I did adore a twinkling star, But now I worship a celestial sun.

Unheedful vows may heedfully be broken, And he wants wit that wants resolved will To learn his wit to exchange the bad for better.

Fie, fie, unreverend tongue! to call her bad, Whose sovereignty so oft thou hast preferr'd With twenty thousand soul-confirming oaths.

I cannot leave to love, and yet I do, But there I leave to love where I should love.

Julia I lose and Valentine I lose: If I keep them, I needs must lose myself, If I lose them, thus find I by their loss For Valentine myself, for Julia Silvia.

I to myself am dearer than a friend, For love is still most precious in itself, And Silvia--witness Heaven, that made her fair!-- Shows Julia but a swarthy Ethiope.

I will forget that Julia is alive, Remembering that my love to her is dead, And Valentine I'll hold an enemy, Aiming at Silvia as a sweeter friend.

I cannot now prove constant to myself, Without some treachery used to Valentine.

This night he meaneth with a corded ladder To climb celestial Silvia's chamber-window, Myself in counsel, his competitor.

O, know'st thou not his looks are my soul's food? Pity the dearth that I have pined in, By longing for that food so long a time.

Didst thou but know the inly touch of love, Thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow As seek to quench the fire of love with words.

I do not seek to quench your love's hot fire, But qualify the fire's extreme rage, Lest it should burn above the bounds of reason.

But in what habit will you go along? Not like a woman, for I would prevent The loose encounters of lascivious men: Gentle Lucetta, fit me with such weeds As may beseem some well-reputed page.

No, girl, I'll knit it up in silken strings With twenty odd-conceited true-love knots.

To be fantastic may become a youth Of greater time than I shall show to be.

What fashion, madam shall I make your breeches? That fits as well as 'Tell me, good my lord, What compass will you wear your farthingale?' Why even what fashion thou best likest, Lucetta.

A round hose, madam, now's not worth a pin, Unless you have a codpiece to stick pins on.

Lucetta, as thou lovest me, let me have What thou thinkest meet and is most mannerly.

But tell me, wench, how will the world repute me For undertaking so unstaid a journey? I fear me, it will make me scandalized.

If Proteus like your journey when you come, No matter who's displeased when you are gone: I fear me, he will scarce be pleased withal.

That is the least, Lucetta, of my fear: A thousand oaths, an ocean of his tears And instances of infinite of love Warrant me welcome to my Proteus.

All that is mine I leave at thy dispose, My goods, my lands, my reputation, Only, in lieu thereof, dispatch me hence.

Come, answer not, but to it presently! I am impatient of my tarriance.

Sir Thurio, give us leave, I pray, awhile, We have some secrets to confer about.

Know, worthy prince, Sir Valentine, my friend, This night intends to steal away your daughter: Myself am one made privy to the plot.

I know you have determined to bestow her On Thurio, whom your gentle daughter hates, And should she thus be stol'n away from you, It would be much vexation to your age.

Proteus, I thank thee for thine honest care, Which to requite, command me while I live.

But, good my Lord, do it so cunningly That my discovery be not aimed at, For love of you, not hate unto my friend, Hath made me publisher of this pretence.

Upon mine honour, he shall never know That I had any light from thee of this.

Sir Valentine, whither away so fast? Please it your grace, there is a messenger That stays to bear my letters to my friends, And I am going to deliver them.

Be they of much import? The tenor of them doth but signify My health and happy being at your court.

Nay then, no matter, stay with me awhile, I am to break with thee of some affairs That touch me near, wherein thou must be secret.

'Tis not unknown to thee that I have sought To match my friend Sir Thurio to my daughter.

Win her with gifts, if she respect not words: Dumb jewels often in their silent kind More than quick words do move a woman's mind.

Send her another, never give her o'er, For scorn at first makes after-love the more.

If she do frown, 'tis not in hate of you, But rather to beget more love in you: If she do chide, 'tis not to have you gone, For why, the fools are mad, if left alone.

Take no repulse, whatever she doth say, For 'get you gone,' she doth not mean 'away!' Flatter and praise, commend, extol their graces, Though ne'er so black, say they have angels' faces.

That man that hath a tongue, I say, is no man, If with his tongue he cannot win a woman.

But she I mean is promised by her friends Unto a youthful gentleman of worth, And kept severely from resort of men, That no man hath access by day to her.

Ay, but the doors be lock'd and keys kept safe, That no man hath recourse to her by night.

What lets but one may enter at her window? Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground, And built so shelving that one cannot climb it Without apparent hazard of his life.

Why then, a ladder quaintly made of cords, To cast up, with a pair of anchoring hooks, Would serve to scale another Hero's tower, So bold Leander would adventure it.

Now, as thou art a gentleman of blood, Advise me where I may have such a ladder.

This very night, for Love is like a child, That longs for every thing that he can come by.

But, hark thee, I will go to her alone: How shall I best convey the ladder thither? It will be light, my lord, that you may bear it Under a cloak that is of any length.

A cloak as long as thine will serve the turn? Ay, my good lord.

Then let me see thy cloak: I'll get me one of such another length.

How shall I fashion me to wear a cloak? I pray thee, let me feel thy cloak upon me.

What letter is this same? What's here? 'To Silvia'! And here an engine fit for my proceeding.

What's here? 'Silvia, this night I will enfranchise thee.

But if thou linger in my territories Longer than swiftest expedition Will give thee time to leave our royal court, By heaven! my wrath shall far exceed the love I ever bore my daughter or thyself.

Be gone! I will not hear thy vain excuse, But, as thou lovest thy life, make speed from hence.

I fly not death, to fly his deadly doom: Tarry I here, I but attend on death: But, fly I hence, I fly away from life.

Soho, soho! What seest thou? Him we go to find: there's not a hair on's head but 'tis a Valentine.

Who then? his spirit? What then? Can nothing speak? Master, shall I strike? Who wouldst thou strike? Villain, forbear.

Why, sir, I'll strike nothing: I pray you,-- Sirrah, I say, forbear.

Friend Valentine, a word. My ears are stopt and cannot hear good news, So much of bad already hath possess'd them.

Then in dumb silence will I bury mine, For they are harsh, untuneable and bad.

What is your news? Sir, there is a proclamation that you are vanished.

That thou art banished--O, that's the news!-- From hence, from Silvia and from me thy friend.

O, I have fed upon this woe already, And now excess of it will make me surfeit.

Besides, her intercession chafed him so, When she for thy repeal was suppliant, That to close prison he commanded her, With many bitter threats of biding there.

No more, unless the next word that thou speak'st Have some malignant power upon my life: If so, I pray thee, breathe it in mine ear, As ending anthem of my endless dolour.

Cease to lament for that thou canst not help, And study help for that which thou lament'st.

Here if thou stay, thou canst not see thy love, Besides, thy staying will abridge thy life.

Hope is a lover's staff, walk hence with that And manage it against despairing thoughts.

Thy letters may be here, though thou art hence, Which, being writ to me, shall be deliver'd Even in the milk-white bosom of thy love.

The time now serves not to expostulate: Come, I'll convey thee through the city-gate, And, ere I part with thee, confer at large Of all that may concern thy love-affairs.

As thou lovest Silvia, though not for thyself, Regard thy danger, and along with me! I pray thee, Launce, an if thou seest my boy, Bid him make haste and meet me at the North-gate.

Come, Valentine. O my dear Silvia! Hapless Valentine! I am but a fool, look you, and yet I have the wit to think my master is a kind of a knave: but that's all one, if he be but one knave.

She hath more qualities than a water-spaniel, which is much in a bare Christian.

Pulling out a paper Here is the cate-log of her condition.

Why, a horse can do no more: nay, a horse cannot fetch, but only carry, therefore is she better than a jade.

'Item: She can milk,' look you, a sweet virtue in a maid with clean hands.

How now, Signior Launce! what news with your With my master's ship? why, it is at sea.

What news, then, in your paper? The blackest news that ever thou heardest.

Tell me this: who begot thee? Marry, the son of my grandfather.

O illiterate loiterer! it was the son of thy grandmother: this proves that thou canst not read.

And thereof comes the proverb: 'Blessing of your heart, you brew good ale.

That's as much as to say, Can she so? 'Item: She can knit.

What need a man care for a stock with a wench, when she can knit him a stock? 'Item: She can wash and scour.

A special virtue: for then she need not be washed and scoured.

Then may I set the world on wheels, when she can spin for her living.

That's as much as to say, bastard virtues, that, indeed, know not their fathers and therefore have no names.

'Item: She is not to be kissed fasting in respect of her breath.

It's no matter for that, so she sleep not in her talk.

O villain, that set this down among her vices! To be slow in words is a woman's only virtue: I pray thee, out with't, and place it for her chief virtue.

Out with that too, it was Eve's legacy, and cannot be ta'en from her.

I care not for that neither, because I love crusts.

If her liquor be good, she shall: if she will not, I will, for good things should be praised.

Of her tongue she cannot, for that's writ down she is slow of, of her purse she shall not, for that I'll keep shut: now, of another thing she may, and that cannot I help.

Well, proceed. 'Item: She hath more hair than wit, and more faults than hairs, and more wealth than faults.

Stop there, I'll have her: she was mine, and not mine, twice or thrice in that last article.

'Item: She hath more hair than wit,'-- More hair than wit? It may be, I'll prove it.

The cover of the salt hides the salt, and therefore it is more than the salt, the hair that covers the wit is more than the wit, for the greater hides the less.

What's next? 'And more faults than hairs,'-- That's monstrous: O, that that were out! 'And more wealth than faults.

Well, I'll have her, and if it be a match, as nothing is What then? Why, then will I tell thee--that thy master stays for thee at the North-gate.

For me? For thee! ay, who art thou? he hath stayed for a better man than thee.

And must I go to him? Thou must run to him, for thou hast stayed so long that going will scarce serve the turn.

Sir Thurio, fear not but that she will love you, Now Valentine is banish'd from her sight.

Since his exile she hath despised me most, Forsworn my company and rail'd at me, That I am desperate of obtaining her.

This weak impress of love is as a figure Trenched in ice, which with an hour's heat Dissolves to water and doth lose his form.

A little time will melt her frozen thoughts And worthless Valentine shall be forgot.

How now, Sir Proteus! Is your countryman According to our proclamation gone? Gone, my good lord.

Proteus, the good conceit I hold of thee-- For thou hast shown some sign of good desert-- Makes me the better to confer with thee.

Longer than I prove loyal to your grace Let me not live to look upon your grace.

Thou know'st how willingly I would effect The match between Sir Thurio and my daughter.

And also, I think, thou art not ignorant How she opposes her against my will She did, my lord, when Valentine was here.

Ay, if his enemy deliver it: Therefore it must with circumstance be spoken By one whom she esteemeth as his friend.

And that, my lord, I shall be loath to do: 'Tis an ill office for a gentleman, Especially against his very friend.

Where your good word cannot advantage him, Your slander never can endamage him, Therefore the office is indifferent, Being entreated to it by your friend.

You have prevail'd, my lord, if I can do it By ought that I can speak in his dispraise, She shall not long continue love to him.

But say this weed her love from Valentine, It follows not that she will love Sir Thurio.

And, Proteus, we dare trust you in this kind, Because we know, on Valentine's report, You are already Love's firm votary And cannot soon revolt and change your mind.

Therefore, sweet Proteus, my direction-giver, Let us into the city presently To sort some gentlemen well skill'd in music.

I have a sonnet that will serve the turn To give the onset to thy good advice.

About it, gentlemen! We'll wait upon your grace till after supper, And afterward determine our proceedings.

Stand, sir, and throw us that you have about ye: If not: we'll make you sit and rifle you.

Sir, we are undone, these are the villains That all the travellers do fear so much.

My friends,-- That's not so, sir: we are your enemies.

Have you long sojourned there? Some sixteen months, and longer might have stay'd, If crooked fortune had not thwarted me.

For what offence? For that which now torments me to rehearse: I kill'd a man, whose death I much repent, Bu t yet I slew him manfully in fight, Without false vantage or base treachery.

But were you banish'd for so small a fault? I was, and held me glad of such a doom.

Have you the tongues? My youthful travel therein made me happy, Or else I often had been miserable.

By the bare scalp of Robin Hood's fat friar, This fellow were a king for our wild faction! We'll have him.

Sirs, a word. Master, be one of them, it's an honourable kind of thievery.

Peace, villain! Tell us this: have you any thing to take to? Nothing but my fortune.

And I from Mantua, for a gentleman, Who, in my mood, I stabb'd unto the heart.

I take your offer and will live with you, Provided that you do no outrages On silly women or poor passengers.

Come, go with us, we'll bring thee to our crews, And show thee all the treasure we have got, Which, with ourselves, all rest at thy dispose.

Already have I been false to Valentine And now I must be as unjust to Thurio.

Under the colour of commending him, I have access my own love to prefer: But Silvia is too fair, too true, too holy, To be corrupted with my worthless gifts.

But here comes Thurio: now must we to her window, And give some evening music to her ear.

How now, Sir Proteus, are you crept before us? Ay, gentle Thurio: for you know that love Will creep in service where it cannot go.

Now, gentlemen, Let's tune, and to it lustily awhile.

Now, my young guest, methinks you're allycholly: I pray you, why is it? Marry, mine host, because I cannot be merry.

Come, we'll have you merry: I'll bring you where you shall hear music and see the gentleman that you asked for.

Music plays Hark, hark! Is he among these? Ay: but, peace! let's hear 'em.

Who is Silvia? what is she, That all our swains commend her? Holy, fair and wise is she, The heaven such grace did lend her, That she might admired be.

Is she kind as she is fair? For beauty lives with kindness.

Love doth to her eyes repair, To help him of his blindness, And, being help'd, inhabits there.

Then to Silvia let us sing, That Silvia is excelling, She excels each mortal thing Upon the dull earth dwelling: To her let us garlands bring.

How now! are you sadder than you were before? How do you, man? the music likes you not.

How? out of tune on the strings? Not so, but yet so false that he grieves my very You have a quick ear.

Ay, I would I were deaf, it makes me have a slow heart.

Hark, what fine change is in the music! Ay, that change is the spite.

You would have them always play but one thing? I would always have one play but one thing.

But, host, doth this Sir Proteus that we talk on Often resort unto this gentlewoman? I tell you what Launce, his man, told me: he loved her out of all nick.

Where is Launce? Gone to seek his dog, which tomorrow, by his master's command, he must carry for a present to his lady.

Sir Thurio, fear not you: I will so plead That you shall say my cunning drift excels.

Who is that that spake? One, lady, if you knew his pure heart's truth, You would quickly learn to know him by his voice.

You have your wish, my will is even this: That presently you hie you home to bed.

I grant, sweet love, that I did love a lady, But she is dead.

Say that she be, yet Valentine thy friend Survives, to whom, thyself art witness, I am betroth'd: and art thou not ashamed To wrong him with thy importunacy? I likewise hear that Valentine is dead.

And so suppose am I, for in his grave Assure thyself my love is buried.

Go to thy lady's grave and call hers thence, Or, at the least, in hers sepulchre thine.

I am very loath to be your idol, sir, But since your falsehood shall become you well To worship shadows and adore false shapes, Send to me in the morning and I'll send it: And so, good rest.

As wretches have o'ernight That wait for execution in the morn.

Host, will you go? By my halidom, I was fast asleep.

Pray you, where lies Sir Proteus? Marry, at my house.

Trust me, I think 'tis almost Not so, but it hath been the longest night That e'er I watch'd and the most heaviest.

This is the hour that Madam Silvia Entreated me to call and know her mind: There's some great matter she'ld employ me in.

Madam, madam! Who calls? Your servant and your friend, One that attends your ladyship's command.

As many, worthy lady, to yourself: According to your ladyship's impose, I am thus early come to know what service It is your pleasure to command me in.

Thyself hast loved, and I have heard thee say No grief did ever come so near thy heart As when thy lady and thy true love died, Upon whose grave thou vow'dst pure chastity.

Sir Eglamour, I would to Valentine, To Mantua, where I hear he makes abode, And, for the ways are dangerous to pass, I do desire thy worthy company, Upon whose faith and honour I repose.

I do desire thee, even from a heart As full of sorrows as the sea of sands, To bear me company and go with me: If not, to hide what I have said to thee, That I may venture to depart alone.

Madam, I pity much your grievances, Which since I know they virtuously are placed, I give consent to go along with you, Recking as little what betideth me As much I wish all good befortune you.

Where shall I meet you? At Friar Patrick's cell, Where I intend holy confession.

Good morrow, gentle lady. Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamour.

I have taught him, even as one would say precisely, 'thus I would teach a dog.

If I had not had more wit than he, to take a fault upon me that he did, I think verily he had been hanged for't, sure as I live, he had suffered for't, you shall judge.

He thrusts me himself into the company of three or four gentlemanlike dogs under the duke's table: he had not been there--bless the mark!--a pissing while, but all the chamber smelt him.

'Out with the dog!' says one: 'What cur is that?' says another: 'Whip him out' says the third: 'Hang him up' says the duke.

I, having been acquainted with the smell before, knew it was Crab, and goes me to the fellow that whips the dogs: 'Friend,' quoth I, 'you mean to whip the dog?' 'Ay, marry, do I,' quoth he.

'You do him the more wrong,' quoth I, ''twas I did the thing you wot of.

He makes me no more ado, but whips me out of the chamber.

To LAUNCE How now, you whoreson peasant! Where have you been these two days loitering? Marry, sir, I carried Mistress Silvia the dog you bade me.

And what says she to my little jewel? Marry, she says your dog was a cur, and tells you currish thanks is good enough for such a present.

But she received my dog? No, indeed, did she not: here have I brought him back again.

Go get thee hence, and find my dog again, Or ne'er return again into my sight.

Go presently and take this ring with thee, Deliver it to Madam Silvia: She loved me well deliver'd it to me.

Why dost thou cry 'alas'? I cannot choose But pity her.

Wherefore shouldst thou pity her? Because methinks that she loved you as well As you do love your lady Silvia: She dreams of him that has forgot her love, You dote on her that cares not for your love.

'Tis pity love should be so contrary, And thinking of it makes me cry 'alas!' Well, give her that ring and therewithal This letter.

That's her chamber. Tell my lady I claim the promise for her heavenly picture.

Your message done, hie home unto my chamber, Where thou shalt find me, sad and solitary.

How many women would do such a message? Alas, poor Proteus! thou hast entertain'd A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs.

Alas, poor fool! why do I pity him That with his very heart despiseth me? Because he loves her, he despiseth me, Because I love him I must pity him.

I am my master's true-confirmed love, But cannot be true servant to my master, Unless I prove false traitor to myself.

Yet will I woo for him, but yet so coldly As, heaven it knows, I would not have him speed.

Gentlewoman, good day! I pray you, be my mean To bring me where to speak with Madam Silvia.

What would you with her, if that I be she? If you be she, I do entreat your patience To hear me speak the message I am sent on.

Go give your master this: tell him from me, One Julia, that his changing thoughts forget, Would better fit his chamber than this shadow.

- Pardon me, madam, I have unadvised Deliver'd you a paper that I should not: This is the letter to your ladyship.

There, hold! I will not look upon your master's lines: I know they are stuff'd with protestations And full of new-found oaths, which he will break As easily as I do tear his paper.

The more shame for him that he sends it me, For I have heard him say a thousand times His Julia gave it him at his departure.

Though his false finger have profaned the ring, Mine shall not do his Julia so much wrong.

What say'st thou? I thank you, madam, that you tender her.

Dost thou know her? Almost as well as I do know myself: To think upon her woes I do protest That I have wept a hundred several times.

Alas, poor lady, desolate and left! I weep myself to think upon thy words.

Here, youth, there is my purse, I give thee this For thy sweet mistress' sake, because thou lovest her.

And she shall thank you for't, if e'er you know her.

A virtuous gentlewoman, mild and beautiful I hope my master's suit will be but cold, Since she respects my mistress' love so much.

Her hair is auburn, mine is perfect yellow: If that be all the difference in his love, I'll get me such a colour'd periwig.

Her eyes are grey as glass, and so are mine: Ay, but her forehead's low, and mine's as high.

What should it be that he respects in her But I can make respective in myself, If this fond Love were not a blinded god? Come, shadow, come and take this shadow up, For 'tis thy rival.

O thou senseless form, Thou shalt be worshipp'd, kiss'd, loved and adored! And, were there sense in his idolatry, My substance should be statue in thy stead.

She will not fail, for lovers break not hours, Unless it be to come before their time, So much they spur their expedition.

Lady, a happy evening! Amen, amen! Go on, good Eglamour, Out at the postern by the abbey-wall: I fear I am attended by some spies.

Fear not: the forest is not three leagues off, If we recover that, we are sure enough.

Sir Proteus, what says Silvia to my suit? O, sir, I find her milder than she was, And yet she takes exceptions at your person.

What, that my leg is too long? No, that it is too little.

What says she to my face? She says it is a fair one.

But pearls are fair, and the old saying is, Black men are pearls in beauteous ladies' eyes.

ladies' eyes, For I had rather wink than look on them.

How likes she my discourse? Ill, when you talk of war.

But well, when I discourse of love and peace? What says she to my valour? O, sir, she makes no doubt of that.

What says she to my birth? That you are well derived.

Considers she my possessions? O, ay, and pities them.

How now, Sir Proteus! how now, Thurio! Which of you saw Sir Eglamour of late? Not I.

Saw you my daughter? Why then, She's fled unto that peasant Valentine, And Eglamour is in her company.

Why, this it is to be a peevish girl, That flies her fortune when it follows her.

I'll after, more to be revenged on Eglamour Than for the love of reckless Silvia.

And I will follow, more for Silvia's love Than hate of Eglamour that goes with her.

And I will follow, more to cross that love Than hate for Silvia that is gone for love.

Come, come, Be patient, we must bring you to our captain.

A thousand more mischances than this one Have learn'd me how to brook this patiently.

Where is the gentleman that was with her? Being nimble-footed, he hath outrun us, But Moyses and Valerius follow him.

Go thou with her to the west end of the wood, There is our captain: we'll follow him that's fled, The thicket is beset, he cannot 'scape.

Come, I must bring you to our captain's cave: Fear not, he bears an honourable mind, And will not use a woman lawlessly.

They love me well, yet I have much to do To keep them from uncivil outrages.

O miserable, unhappy that I am! Unhappy were you, madam, ere I came, But by my coming I have made you happy.

Had I been seized by a hungry lion, I would have been a breakfast to the beast, Rather than have false Proteus rescue me.

O, Heaven be judge how I love Valentine, Whose life's as tender to me as my soul! And full as much, for more there cannot be, I do detest false perjured Proteus.

Read over Julia's heart, thy first best love, For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith Into a thousand oaths, and all those oaths Descended into perjury, to love me.

Nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words Can no way change you to a milder form, I'll woo you like a soldier, at arms' end, And love you 'gainst the nature of love,--force ye.

Who should be trusted, when one's own right hand Is perjured to the bosom? Proteus, I am sorry I must never trust thee more, But count the world a stranger for thy sake.

The private wound is deepest: O time most accurst, 'Mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst! My shame and guilt confounds me.

Forgive me, Valentine: if hearty sorrow Be a sufficient ransom for offence, I tender 't here, I do as truly suffer As e'er I did commit.

Then I am paid, And once again I do receive thee honest.

Who by repentance is not satisfied Is nor of heaven nor earth, for these are pleased.

By penitence the Eternal's wrath's appeased: And, that my love may appear plain and free, All that was mine in Silvia I give thee.

Why, boy! why, wag! how now! what's the matter? Look up, speak.

O good sir, my master charged me to deliver a ring to Madam Silvia, which, out of my neglect, was never done.

How! let me see: Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia.

O, cry you mercy, sir, I have mistook: This is the ring you sent to Silvia.

But how camest thou by this ring? At my depart I gave this unto Julia.

And Julia herself did give it me, And Julia herself hath brought it hither.

How! Julia! Behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths, And entertain'd 'em deeply in her heart.

That one error Fills him with faults, makes him run through all the sins: Inconstancy falls off ere it begins.

A prize, a prize, a prize! Forbear, forbear, I say! it is my lord the duke.

Your grace is welcome to a man disgraced, Banished Valentine.

Sir Valentine! Yonder is Silvia, and Silvia's mine.

Thurio, give back, or else embrace thy death, Come not within the measure of my wrath, Do not name Silvia thine, if once again, Verona shall not hold thee.

Here she stands, Take but possession of her with a touch: I dare thee but to breathe upon my love.

Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I, I hold him but a fool that will endanger His body for a girl that loves him not: I claim her not, and therefore she is thine.

The more degenerate and base art thou, To make such means for her as thou hast done And leave her on such slight conditions.

I now beseech you, for your daughter's sake, To grant one boom that I shall ask of you.

Thou hast prevail'd, I pardon them and thee: Dispose of them as thou know'st their deserts.

Come, let us go: we will include all jars With triumphs, mirth and rare solemnity.

And, as we walk along, I dare be bold With our discourse to make your grace to smile.

What think you of this page, my lord? I think the boy hath grace in him, he blushes.

What mean you by that saying? Please you, I'll tell you as we pass along, That you will wonder what hath fortuned.

Come, Proteus, 'tis your penance but to hear The story of your loves discovered: That done, our day of marriage shall be yours, One feast, one house, one mutual happiness.

If you shall chance, Camillo, to visit Bohemia, on the like occasion whereon my services are now on foot, you shall see, as I have said, great difference betwixt our Bohemia and your Sicilia.

I think, this coming summer, the King of Sicilia means to pay Bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him.

We will give you sleepy drinks, that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience, may, though they cannot praise us, as little accuse You pay a great deal too dear for what's given freely.

Believe me, I speak as my understanding instructs me and as mine honesty puts it to utterance.

They were trained together in their childhoods, and there rooted betwixt them then such an affection, which cannot choose but branch now.

The heavens continue their loves! I think there is not in the world either malice or matter to alter it.

You have an unspeakable comfort of your young prince Mamillius: it is a gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came into my note.

Would they else be content to die? Yes, if there were no other excuse why they should desire to live.

If the king had no son, they would desire to live on crutches till he had one.

Stay your thanks a while, And pay them when you part.

We are tougher, brother, Than you can put us to't.

We'll part the time between's then, and in that I'll no gainsaying.

There is no tongue that moves, none, none i' the world, So soon as yours could win me: so it should now, Were there necessity in your request, although 'Twere needful I denied it.

My affairs Do even drag me homeward: which to hinder Were in your love a whip to me, my stay To you a charge and trouble: to save both, Farewell, our brother.

I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until You have drawn oaths from him not to stay.

Tell him, you are sure All in Bohemia's well, this satisfaction The by-gone day proclaim'd: say this to him, He's beat from his best ward.

To tell, he longs to see his son, were strong: But let him say so then, and let him go, But let him swear so, and he shall not stay, We'll thwack him hence with distaffs.

Yet of your royal presence I'll adventure The borrow of a week.

You put me off with limber vows, but I, Though you would seek to unsphere the stars with oaths, Should yet say 'Sir, no going.

Verily, You shall not go: a lady's 'Verily' 's As potent as a lord's.

Will you go yet? Force me to keep you as a prisoner, Not like a guest, so you shall pay your fees When you depart, and save your thanks.

How say you? My prisoner? or my guest? by your dread 'Verily,' One of them you shall be.

Your guest, then, madam: To be your prisoner should import offending, Which is for me less easy to commit Than you to punish.

Had we pursued that life, And our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd With stronger blood, we should have answer'd heaven Boldly 'not guilty,' the imposition clear'd Hereditary ours.

O my most sacred lady! Temptations have since then been born to's, for In those unfledged days was my wife a girl, Your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes Of my young play-fellow.

Hermione, my dearest, thou never spokest To better purpose.

What! have I twice said well? when was't before? I prithee tell me, cram's with praise, and make's As fat as tame things: one good deed dying tongueless Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.

Our praises are our wages: you may ride's With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere With spur we beat an acre.

Why, that was when Three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death, Ere I could make thee open thy white hand And clap thyself my love: then didst thou utter 'I am yours for ever.

Why, lo you now, I have spoke to the purpose twice: The one for ever earn'd a royal husband, The other for some while a friend.

I have tremor cordis on me: my heart dances, But not for joy, not joy.

What, hast smutch'd thy nose? They say it is a copy out of mine.

Come, captain, We must be neat, not neat, but cleanly, captain: And yet the steer, the heifer and the calf Are all call'd neat.

-Still virginalling Upon his palm!--How now, you wanton calf! Art thou my calf? Yes, if you will, my lord.

How, my lord! What cheer? how is't with you, best brother? You look as if you held a brow of much distraction Are you moved, my lord? No, in good earnest.

Mine honest friend, Will you take eggs for money? No, my lord, I'll fight.

So stands this squire Officed with me: we two will walk, my lord, And leave you to your graver steps.

Hermione, How thou lovest us, show in our brother's welcome, Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap: Next to thyself and my young rover, he's Apparent to my heart.

If you would seek us, We are yours i' the garden: shall's attend you there? To your own bents dispose you: you'll be found, Be you beneath the sky.

I am angling now, Though you perceive me not how I give line.

Should all despair That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind Would hang themselves.

You had much ado to make his anchor hold: When you cast out, it still came home.

Didst note it? He would not stay at your petitions: made His business more material.

Didst perceive it? They're here with me already, whispering, rounding 'Sicilia is a so-forth:' 'tis far gone, When I shall gust it last.

How came't, Camillo, That he did stay? At the good queen's entreaty.

At the queen's be't: 'good' should be pertinent But, so it is, it is not.

Business, my lord! I think most understand Bohemia stays here longer.

Ay, but why? To satisfy your highness and the entreaties Of our most gracious mistress.

The entreaties of your mistress! satisfy! Let that suffice.

My gracious lord, I may be negligent, foolish and fearful, In every one of these no man is free, But that his negligence, his folly, fear, Among the infinite doings of the world, Sometime puts forth.

But, beseech your grace, Be plainer with me, let me know my trespass By its own visage: if I then deny it, 'Tis none of mine.

Good my lord, be cured Of this diseased opinion, and betimes, For 'tis most dangerous.

Thou dost advise me Even so as I mine own course have set down: I'll give no blemish to her honour, none.

My lord, Go then, and with a countenance as clear As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia And with your queen.

I am his cupbearer: If from me he have wholesome beverage, Account me not your servant.

This is all: Do't and thou hast the one half of my heart, Do't not, thou split'st thine own.

If I could find example Of thousands that had struck anointed kings And flourish'd after, I'ld not do't, but since Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one, Let villany itself forswear't.

I must Forsake the court: to do't, or no, is certain To me a break-neck.

Re-enter POLIXENES This is strange: methinks My favour here begins to warp.

Hail, most royal sir! What is the news i' the court? None rare, my lord.

Do you know, and dare not? Be intelligent to me: 'tis thereabouts, For, to yourself, what you do know, you must.

Good Camillo, Your changed complexions are to me a mirror Which shows me mine changed too, for I must be A party in this alteration, finding Myself thus alter'd with 't.

There is a sickness Which puts some of us in distemper, but I cannot name the disease, and it is caught Of you that yet are well.

How! caught of me! Make me not sighted like the basilisk: I have look'd on thousands, who have sped the better By my regard, but kill'd none so.

A sickness caught of me, and yet I well! I must be answer'd.

How should this grow? I know not: but I am sure 'tis safer to Avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born.

For myself, I'll put My fortunes to your service, which are here By this discovery lost.

Give me thy hand: Be pilot to me and thy places shall Still neighbour mine.

My ships are ready and My people did expect my hence departure Two days ago.

It is in mine authority to command The keys of all the posterns: please your highness To take the urgent hour.

Come, sir, away. Take the boy to you: he so troubles me, 'Tis past enduring.

Come, my gracious lord, Shall I be your playfellow? No, I'll none of you.

Why, my sweet lord? You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as if I were a baby still.

Who taught you this? I learnt it out of women's faces.

Pray now What colour are your eyebrows? Blue, my lord.

Nay, that's a mock: I have seen a lady's nose That has been blue, but not her eyebrows.

Hark ye, The queen your mother rounds apace: we shall Present our services to a fine new prince One of these days, and then you'ld wanton with us, If we would have you.

She is spread of late Into a goodly bulk: good time encounter her! What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, now I am for you again: pray you, sit by us, And tell 's a tale.

A sad tale's best for winter: I have one Of sprites and goblins.

Come on, sit down: come on, and do your best To fright me with your sprites, you're powerful at it.

Dwelt by a churchyard: I will tell it softly, Yond crickets shall not hear it.

Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him? Behind the tuft of pines I met them, never Saw I men scour so on their way: I eyed them Even to their ships.

How came the posterns So easily open? By his great authority, Which often hath no less prevail'd than so On your command.

Give me the boy: I am glad you did not nurse him: Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you Have too much blood in him.

What is this? sport? Bear the boy hence, he shall not come about her, Away with him! and let her sport herself With that she's big with, for 'tis Polixenes Has made thee swell thus.

But I'ld say he had not, And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying, Howe'er you lean to the nayward.

Should a villain say so, The most replenish'd villain in the world, He were as much more villain: you, my lord, Do but mistake.

How will this grieve you, When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that You thus have publish'd me! Gentle my lord, You scarce can right me throughly then to say You did mistake.

No, if I mistake In those foundations which I build upon, The centre is not big enough to bear A school-boy's top.

Away with her! to prison! He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty But that he speaks.

There's some ill planet reigns: I must be patient till the heavens look With an aspect more favourable.

Do not weep, good fools, There is no cause: when you shall know your mistress Has deserved prison, then abound in tears As I come out: this action I now go on Is for my better grace.

Adieu, my lord: I never wish'd to see you sorry, now I trust I shall.

My women, come, you have leave. Go, do our bidding, hence! Beseech your highness, call the queen again.

Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice Prove violence, in the which three great ones suffer, Yourself, your queen, your son.

For her, my lord, I dare my life lay down and will do't, sir, Please you to accept it, that the queen is spotless I' the eyes of heaven and to you, I mean, In this which you accuse her.

Good my lord,-- It is for you we speak, not for ourselves: You are abused and by some putter-on That will be damn'd for't, would I knew the villain, I would land-damn him.

You smell this business with a sense as cold As is a dead man's nose: but I do see't and feel't As you feel doing thus, and see withal The instruments that feel.

If it be so, We need no grave to bury honesty: There's not a grain of it the face to sweeten Of the whole dungy earth.

What! lack I credit? I had rather you did lack than I, my lord, Upon this ground, and more it would content me To have her honour true than your suspicion, Be blamed for't how you might.

And I wish, my liege, You had only in your silent judgment tried it, Without more overture.

How could that be? Either thou art most ignorant by age, Or thou wert born a fool.

Though I am satisfied and need no more Than what I know, yet shall the oracle Give rest to the minds of others, such as he Whose ignorant credulity will not Come up to the truth.

So have we thought it good From our free person she should be confined, Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence Be left her to perform.

Come, follow us, We are to speak in public, for this business Will raise us all.

To laughter, as I take it, If the good truth were known.

The keeper of the prison, call to him, let him have knowledge who I am.

I may not, madam: To the contrary I have express commandment.

Here's such ado to make no stain a stain As passes colouring.

A boy? A daughter, and a goodly babe, Lusty and like to live: the queen receives Much comfort in't, says 'My poor prisoner, I am innocent as you.

Pray you, Emilia, Commend my best obedience to the queen: If she dares trust me with her little babe, I'll show't the king and undertake to be Her advocate to the loud'st.

We do not know How he may soften at the sight o' the child: The silence often of pure innocence Persuades when speaking fails.

Most worthy madam, Your honour and your goodness is so evident That your free undertaking cannot miss A thriving issue: there is no lady living So meet for this great errand.

I'll use that tongue I have: if wit flow from't As boldness from my bosom, let 't not be doubted I shall do good.

Now be you blest for it! I'll to the queen: please you, come something nearer.

Madam, if't please the queen to send the babe, I know not what I shall incur to pass it, Having no warrant.

Do not you fear: upon mine honour, I will stand betwixt you and danger.

Nor night nor day no rest: it is but weakness To bear the matter thus, mere weakness.

Who's there? My lord? How does the boy? He took good rest to-night, 'Tis hoped his sickness is discharged.

Camillo and Polixenes Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow: They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor Shall she within my power.

Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me: Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas, Than the queen's life? a gracious innocent soul, More free than he is jealous.

Madam, he hath not slept tonight, commanded None should come at him.

What noise there, ho? No noise, my lord, but needful conference About some gossips for your highness.

Away with that audacious lady! Antigonus, I charged thee that she should not come about me: I knew she would.

I told her so, my lord, On your displeasure's peril and on mine, She should not visit you.

What, canst not rule her? From all dishonesty he can: in this, Unless he take the course that you have done, Commit me for committing honour, trust it, He shall not rule me.

La you now, you hear: When she will take the rein I let her run, But she'll not stumble.

Good queen! Good queen, my lord, Good queen, I say good queen, And would by combat make her good, so were I A man, the worst about you.

Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes First hand me: on mine own accord I'll off, But first I'll do my errand.

The good queen, For she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter, Here 'tis, commends it to your blessing.

Thou dotard! thou art woman-tired, unroosted By thy dame Partlet here.

Take up the bastard, Take't up, I say, give't to thy crone.

For ever Unvenerable be thy hands, if thou Takest up the princess by that forced baseness Which he has put upon't! He dreads his wife.

So I would you did, then 'twere past all doubt You'ld call your children yours.

A nest of traitors! I am none, by this good light.

Hang all the husbands That cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourself Hardly one subject.

A most unworthy and unnatural lord Can do no more.

I care not: It is an heretic that makes the fire, Not she which burns in't.

On your allegiance, Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant, Where were her life? she durst not call me so, If she did know me one.

Away with her! I pray you, do not push me, I'll be gone.

Look to your babe, my lord, 'tis yours: Jove send her A better guiding spirit! What needs these hands? You, that are thus so tender o'er his follies, Will never do him good, not one of you.

My child? away with't! Even thou, that hast A heart so tender o'er it, take it hence And see it instantly consumed with fire, Even thou and none but thou.

Take it up straight: Within this hour bring me word 'tis done, And by good testimony, or I'll seize thy life, With what thou else call'st thine.

If thou refuse And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so, The bastard brains with these my proper hands Shall I dash out.

Go, take it to the fire, For thou set'st on thy wife.

I did not, sir: These lords, my noble fellows, if they please, Can clear me in't.

We can: my royal liege, He is not guilty of her coming hither.

I am a feather for each wind that blows: Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel And call me father? better burn it now Than curse it then.

Mark and perform it, see'st thou! for the fail Of any point in't shall not only be Death to thyself but to thy lewd-tongued wife, Whom for this time we pardon.

As by strange fortune It came to us, I do in justice charge thee, On thy soul's peril and thy body's torture, That thou commend it strangely to some place Where chance may nurse or end it.

Take it up. I swear to do this, though a present death Had been more merciful.

Come on, poor babe: Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say Casting their savageness aside have done Like offices of pity.

Sir, be prosperous In more than this deed does require! And blessing Against this cruelty fight on thy side, Poor thing, condemn'd to loss! No, I'll not rear Another's issue.

Please your highness, posts From those you sent to the oracle are come An hour since: Cleomenes and Dion, Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed, Hasting to the court.

So please you, sir, their speed Hath been beyond account.

Twenty-three days They have been absent: 'tis good speed, foretells The great Apollo suddenly will have The truth of this appear.

Prepare you, lords, Summon a session, that we may arraign Our most disloyal lady, for, as she hath Been publicly accused, so shall she have A just and open trial.

The climate's delicate, the air most sweet, Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing The common praise it bears.

I shall report, For most it caught me, the celestial habits, Methinks I so should term them, and the reverence Of the grave wearers.

O, the sacrifice! How ceremonious, solemn and unearthly It was i' the offering! But of all, the burst And the ear-deafening voice o' the oracle, Kin to Jove's thunder, so surprised my sense.

If the event o' the journey Prove as successful to the queen,--O be't so!-- As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy, The time is worth the use on't.

Great Apollo Turn all to the best! These proclamations, So forcing faults upon Hermione, I little like.

The violent carriage of it Will clear or end the business: when the oracle, Thus by Apollo's great divine seal'd up, Shall the contents discover, something rare Even then will rush to knowledge.

Let us be clear'd Of being tyrannous, since we so openly Proceed in justice, which shall have due course, Even to the guilt or the purgation.

It is his highness' pleasure that the queen Appear in person here in court.

But thus: if powers divine Behold our human actions, as they do, I doubt not then but innocence shall make False accusation blush and tyranny Tremble at patience.

For life, I prize it As I weigh grief, which I would spare: for honour, 'Tis a derivative from me to mine, And only that I stand for.

That's true enough, Through 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me.

More than mistress of Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not At all acknowledge.

You knew of his departure, as you know What you have underta'en to do in's absence.

You speak a language that I understand not: My life stands in the level of your dreams, Which I'll lay down.

Your actions are my dreams, You had a bastard by Polixenes, And I but dream'd it.

Sir, spare your threats: The bug which you would fright me with I seek.

To me can life be no commodity: The crown and comfort of my life, your favour, I do give lost, for I do feel it gone, But know not how it went.

My second joy And first-fruits of my body, from his presence I am barr'd, like one infectious.

Now, my liege, Tell me what blessings I have here alive, That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed.

Your honours all, I do refer me to the oracle: Apollo be my judge! This your request Is altogether just: therefore bring forth, And in Apollos name, his oracle.

Polixenes blameless, Camillo a true subject, Leontes a jealous tyrant, his innocent babe truly begotten, and the king shall live without an heir, if that which is lost be not found.

Now blessed be the great Apollo! Hast thou read truth? Ay, my lord, even so As it is here set down.

There is no truth at all i' the oracle: The sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.

My lord the king, the king! What is the business? O sir, I shall be hated to report it! The prince your son, with mere conceit and fear Of the queen's speed, is gone.

Apollo's angry, and the heavens themselves Do strike at my injustice.

HERMIONE swoons How now there! This news is mortal to the queen: look down And see what death is doing.

Take her hence: Her heart is but o'ercharged, she will recover: I have too much believed mine own suspicion: Beseech you, tenderly apply to her Some remedies for life.

The higher powers forbid! I say she's dead, I'll swear't.

If word nor oath Prevail not, go and see: if you can bring Tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye, Heat outwardly or breath within, I'll serve you As I would do the gods.

But, O thou tyrant! Do not repent these things, for they are heavier Than all thy woes can stir, therefore betake thee To nothing but despair.

A thousand knees Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting, Upon a barren mountain and still winter In storm perpetual, could not move the gods To look that way thou wert.

Go on, go on Thou canst not speak too much, I have deserved All tongues to talk their bitterest.

Say no more: Howe'er the business goes, you have made fault I' the boldness of your speech.

I am sorry for't: All faults I make, when I shall come to know them, I do repent.

Alas! I have show'd too much The rashness of a woman: he is touch'd To the noble heart.

What's gone and what's past help Should be past grief: do not receive affliction At my petition, I beseech you, rather Let me be punish'd, that have minded you Of what you should forget.

Thou didst speak but well When most the truth, which I receive much better Than to be pitied of thee.

Prithee, bring me To the dead bodies of my queen and son: One grave shall be for both: upon them shall The causes of their death appear, unto Our shame perpetual.

Once a day I'll visit The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there Shall be my recreation: so long as nature Will bear up with this exercise, so long I daily vow to use it.

Thou art perfect then, our ship hath touch'd upon The deserts of Bohemia? Ay, my lord: and fear We have landed in ill time: the skies look grimly And threaten present blusters.

In my conscience, The heavens with that we have in hand are angry And frown upon 's.

Their sacred wills be done! Go, get aboard, Look to thy bark: I'll not be long before I call upon thee.

Make your best haste, and go not Too far i' the land: 'tis like to be loud weather, Besides, this place is famous for the creatures Of prey that keep upon't.

Come, poor babe: I have heard, but not believed, the spirits o' the dead May walk again: if such thing be, thy mother Appear'd to me last night, for ne'er was dream So like a waking.

For this ungentle business Put on thee by my lord, thou ne'er shalt see Thy wife Paulina more.

Affrighted much, I did in time collect myself and thought This was so and no slumber.

Dreams are toys: Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously, I will be squared by this.

I do believe Hermione hath suffer'd death, and that Apollo would, this being indeed the issue Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid, Either for life or death, upon the earth Of its right father.

Blossom, speed thee well! There lie, and there thy character: there these, Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty, And still rest thine.

The storm begins, poor wretch, That for thy mother's fault art thus exposed To loss and what may follow! Weep I cannot, But my heart bleeds, and most accursed am I To be by oath enjoin'd to this.

Farewell! The day frowns more and more: thou'rt like to have A lullaby too rough: I never saw The heavens so dim by day.

A savage clamour! Well may I get aboard! This is the chase: I am gone for ever.

This has been some stair-work, some trunk-work, some behind-door-work: they were warmer that got this than the poor thing is here.

I'll take it up for pity: yet I'll tarry till my son come, he hallooed but even now.

Whoa, ho, hoa! Hilloa, loa! What, art so near? If thou'lt see a thing to talk on when thou art dead and rotten, come hither.

What ailest thou, man? I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land! but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is now the sky: betwixt the firmament and it you cannot thrust a bodkin's point.

Why, boy, how is it? I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages, how it takes up the shore! but that's not the point.

And then for the land-service, to see how the bear tore out his shoulder-bone, how he cried to me for help and said his name was Antigonus, a nobleman.

Heavy matters! heavy matters! but look thee here, boy.

Now bless thyself: thou mettest with things dying, I with things newborn.

Here's a sight for thee, look thee, a bearing-cloth for a squire's child! look thee here, take up, take up, boy, open't.

So, let's see: it was told me I should be rich by the fairies.

What's within, boy? You're a made old man: if the sins of your youth are forgiven you, you're well to live.

Gold! all gold! This is fairy gold, boy, and 'twill prove so: up with't, keep it close: home, home, the next way.

We are lucky, boy, and to be so still requires nothing but secrecy.

Let my sheep go: come, good boy, the next way home.

I'll go see if the bear be gone from the gentleman and how much he hath eaten: they are never curst but when they are hungry: if there be any of him left, I'll bury That's a good deed.

If thou mayest discern by that which is left of him what he is, fetch me to the sight of him.

Marry, will I, and you shall help to put him i' the ground.

'Tis a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds on't.

I, that please some, try all, both joy and terror Of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error, Now take upon me, in the name of Time, To use my wings.

A shepherd's daughter, And what to her adheres, which follows after, Is the argument of Time.

Of this allow, If ever you have spent time worse ere now, If never, yet that Time himself doth say He wishes earnestly you never may.

I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more importunate: 'tis a sickness denying thee any thing, a death to grant this.

It is fifteen years since I saw my country: though I have for the most part been aired abroad, I desire to lay my bones there.

Besides, the penitent king, my master, hath sent for me, to whose feeling sorrows I might be some allay, or I o'erween to think so, which is another spur to my departure.

Say to me, when sawest thou the Prince Florizel, my son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue not being gracious, than they are in losing them when they have approved their virtues.

What his happier affairs may be, are to me unknown: but I have missingly noted, he is of late much retired from court and is less frequent to his princely exercises than formerly he hath appeared.

I have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath a daughter of most rare note: the report of her is extended more than can be thought to begin from such a cottage.

That's likewise part of my intelligence, but, I fear, the angle that plucks our son thither.

Prithee, be my present partner in this business, and lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.

When daffodils begin to peer, With heigh! the doxy over the dale, Why, then comes in the sweet o' the year, For the red blood reigns in the winter's pale.

The white sheet bleaching on the hedge, With heigh! the sweet birds, O, how they sing! Doth set my pugging tooth on edge, For a quart of ale is a dish for a king.

The lark, that tirra-lyra chants, With heigh! with heigh! the thrush and the jay, Are summer songs for me and my aunts, While we lie tumbling in the hay.

If tinkers may have leave to live, And bear the sow-skin budget, Then my account I well may, give, And in the stocks avouch it.

My traffic is sheets, when the kite builds, look to lesser linen.

My father named me Autolycus, who being, as I am, littered under Mercury, was likewise a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles.

With die and drab I purchased this caparison, and my revenue is the silly cheat.

Gallows and knock are too powerful on the highway: beating and hanging are terrors to me: for the life to come, I sleep out the thought of it.

A prize! a prize! Let me see: every 'leven wether tods, every tod yields pound and odd shilling, fifteen hundred shorn.

what comes the wool to? If the springe hold, the cock's mine.

O sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me more than the stripes I have received, which are mighty ones and millions.

Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to a great matter.

I am robbed, sir, and beaten, my money and apparel ta'en from me, and these detestable things put upon What, by a horseman, or a footman? A footman, sweet sir, a footman.

Indeed, he should be a footman by the garments he has left with thee: if this be a horseman's coat, it hath seen very hot service.

Lend me thy hand, I'll help thee: come, lend me thy hand.

O, good sir, tenderly, O! Alas, poor soul! O, good sir, softly, good sir! I fear, sir, my shoulder-blade is out.

How now! canst stand? Softly, dear sir, good sir, softly.

Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.

His vices, you would say, there's no virtue whipped out of the court: they cherish it to make it stay there, and yet it will no more but abide.

Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig: he haunts wakes, fairs and bear-baitings.

Very true, sir, he, sir, he, that's the rogue that put me into this apparel.

Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia: if you had but looked big and spit at him, he'ld have run.

Shall I bring thee on the way? No, good-faced sir, no, sweet sir.

Then fare thee well: I must go buy spices for our Prosper you, sweet sir! Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice.

These your unusual weeds to each part of you Do give a life: no shepherdess, but Flora Peering in April's front.

This your sheep-shearing Is as a meeting of the petty gods, And you the queen on't.

I bless the time When my good falcon made her flight across Thy father's ground.

Now Jove afford you cause! To me the difference forges dread, your greatness Hath not been used to fear.

Their transformations Were never for a piece of beauty rarer, Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts Burn hotter than my faith.

Thou dearest Perdita, With these forced thoughts, I prithee, darken not The mirth o' the feast.

For I cannot be Mine own, nor any thing to any, if I be not thine.

To this I am most constant, Though destiny say no.

Be merry, gentle, Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing That you behold the while.

Your guests are coming: Lift up your countenance, as it were the day Of celebration of that nuptial which We two have sworn shall come.

O lady Fortune, Stand you auspicious! See, your guests approach: Address yourself to entertain them sprightly, And let's be red with mirth.

You are retired, As if you were a feasted one and not The hostess of the meeting: pray you, bid These unknown friends to's welcome, for it is A way to make us better friends, more known.

Come, quench your blushes and present yourself That which you are, mistress o' the feast: come on, And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing, As your good flock shall prosper.

It is my father's will I should take on me The hostess-ship o' the day.

Wherefore, gentle maiden, Do you neglect them? For I have heard it said There is an art which in their piedness shares With great creating nature.

Say there be, Yet nature is made better by no mean But nature makes that mean: so, over that art Which you say adds to nature, is an art That nature makes.

Then make your garden rich in gillyvors, And do not call them bastards.

I'll not put The dibble in earth to set one slip of them, No more than were I painted I would wish This youth should say 'twere well and only therefore Desire to breed by me.

You're very welcome. I should leave grazing, were I of your flock, And only live by gazing.

Out, alas! You'd be so lean, that blasts of January Would blow you through and through.

Come, take your flowers: Methinks I play as I have seen them do In Whitsun pastorals: sure this robe of mine Does change my disposition.

I think you have As little skill to fear as I have purpose To put you to't.

But come, our dance, I pray: Your hand, my Perdita: so turtles pair, That never mean to part.

This is the prettiest low-born lass that ever Ran on the green-sward: nothing she does or seems But smacks of something greater than herself, Too noble for this place.

He tells her something That makes her blood look out: good sooth, she is The queen of curds and cream.

Come on, strike up! Mopsa must be your mistress: marry, garlic, To mend her kissing with! Now, in good time! Not a word, a word, we stand upon our manners.

He says he loves my daughter: I think so too, for never gazed the moon Upon the water as he'll stand and read As 'twere my daughter's eyes: and, to be plain.

I think there is not half a kiss to choose Who loves another best.

So she does any thing, though I report it, That should be silent: if young Doricles Do light upon her, she shall bring him that Which he not dreams of.

I love a ballad but even too well, if it be doleful matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant thing indeed and sung lamentably.

Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited fellow.

Prithee bring him in, and let him approach singing.

Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in 's tunes.

You have of these pedlars, that have more in them than you'ld think, sister.

If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst take no money of me, but being enthralled as I am, it will also be the bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.

I was promised them against the feast, but they come not too late now.

He hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.

He hath paid you all he promised you, may be, he has paid you more, which will shame you to give him again.

Come, you promised me a tawdry-lace and a pair of sweet gloves.

Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the way and lost all my money? And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad, therefore it behoves men to be wary.

I hope so, sir, for I have about me many parcels of charge.

What hast here? ballads? Pray now, buy some: I love a ballad in print o' life, for then we are sure they are true.

Here's one to a very doleful tune, how a usurer's wife was brought to bed of twenty money-bags at a burthen and how she longed to eat adders' heads and toads carbonadoed.

Is it true, think you? Very true, and but a month old.

Bless me from marrying a usurer! Here's the midwife's name to't, one Mistress Tale-porter, and five or six honest wives that were present.

Why should I carry lies abroad? Pray you now, buy it.

Come on, lay it by: and let's first see moe ballads, we'll buy the other things anon.

Is it true too, think you? Five justices' hands at it, and witnesses more than my pack will hold.

Why, this is a passing merry one and goes to the tune of 'Two maids wooing a man:' there's scarce a maid westward but she sings it, 'tis in request, I can tell you.

We can both sing it: if thou'lt bear a part, thou shalt hear, 'tis in three parts.

I can bear my part, you must know 'tis my occupation, have at it with you.

Get you hence, for I must go Where it fits not you to know.

O, whither? It becomes thy oath full well, Thou to me thy secrets tell.

Thou hast sworn it more to me: Then whither goest? say, whither? We'll have this song out anon by ourselves: my father and the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we'll not trouble them.

Wenches, I'll buy for you both. Pedlar, let's have the first choice.

Away! we'll none on 't: here has been too much homely foolery already.

I know, sir, we weary you. You weary those that refresh us: pray, let's see these four threes of herdsmen.

One three of them, by their own report, sir, hath danced before the king, and not the worst of the three but jumps twelve foot and a half by the squier.

Leave your prating: since these good men are pleased, let them come in, but quickly now.

Here a dance of twelve Satyrs O, father, you'll know more of that hereafter.

To CAMILLO Is it not too far gone? 'Tis time to part them.

To FLORIZEL How now, fair shepherd! Your heart is full of something that does take Your mind from feasting.

If your lass Interpretation should abuse and call this Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited For a reply, at least if you make a care Of happy holding her.

Old sir, I know She prizes not such trifles as these are: The gifts she looks from me are pack'd and lock'd Up in my heart, which I have given already, But not deliver'd.

What follows this? How prettily the young swain seems to wash The hand was fair before! I have put you out: But to your protestation, let me hear What you profess.

But, my daughter, Say you the like to him? I cannot speak So well, nothing so well, no, nor mean better: By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out The purity of his.

Take hands, a bargain! And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to 't: I give my daughter to him, and will make Her portion equal his.

O, that must be I' the virtue of your daughter: one being dead, I shall have more than you can dream of yet, Enough then for your wonder.

Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you, Have you a father? I have: but what of him? Knows he of this? He neither does nor shall.

Methinks a father Is at the nuptial of his son a guest That best becomes the table.

I yield all this, But for some other reasons, my grave sir, Which 'tis not fit you know, I not acquaint My father of this business.

Let him, my son: he shall not need to grieve At knowing of thy choice.

And thou, fresh piece Of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know The royal fool thou copest with,-- O, my heart! I'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers, and made More homely than thy state.

Thou churl, for this time, Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee From the dead blow of it.

I cannot speak, nor think Nor dare to know that which I know.

O cursed wretch, That knew'st this was the prince, and wouldst adventure To mingle faith with him! Undone! undone! If I might die within this hour, I have lived To die when I desire.

Why look you so upon me? I am but sorry, not afeard, delay'd, But nothing alter'd: what I was, I am, More straining on for plucking back, not following My leash unwillingly.

I am, and by my fancy: if my reason Will thereto be obedient, I have reason, If not, my senses, better pleased with madness, Do bid it welcome.

So call it: but it does fulfil my vow, I needs must think it honesty.

This you may know And so deliver, I am put to sea With her whom here I cannot hold on shore, And most opportune to our need I have A vessel rides fast by, but not prepared For this design.

What course I mean to hold Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor Concern me the reporting.

O my lord! I would your spirit were easier for advice, Or stronger for your need.

Hark, Perdita Drawing her aside I'll hear you by and by.

Now, good Camillo, I am so fraught with curious business that I leave out ceremony.

How, Camillo, May this, almost a miracle, be done? That I may call thee something more than man And after that trust to thee.

Worthy Camillo, What colour for my visitation shall I Hold up before him? Sent by the king your father To greet him and to give him comforts.

One of these is true: I think affliction may subdue the cheek, But not take in the mind.

Yea, say you so? There shall not at your father's house these seven years Be born another such.

My good Camillo, She is as forward of her breeding as She is i' the rear our birth.

I cannot say 'tis pity She lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress To most that teach.

My lord, Fear none of this: I think you know my fortunes Do all lie there: it shall be so my care To have you royally appointed as if The scene you play were mine.

For instance, sir, That you may know you shall not want, one word.

CAMILLO, FLORIZEL, and PERDITA come forward Nay, but my letters, by this means being there So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.

And those that you'll procure from King Leontes-- Shall satisfy your father.

Who have we here? Seeing AUTOLYCUS We'll make an instrument of this, omit Nothing may give us aid.

How now, good fellow! why shakest thou so? Fear not, man, here's no harm intended to thee.

Nay, prithee, dispatch: the gentleman is half flayed already.

Indeed, I have had earnest: but I cannot with conscience take it.

Have you done there? Should I now meet my father, He would not call me son.

O Perdita, what have we twain forgot! Pray you, a word.

Of this escape and whither they are bound, Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail To force him after: in whose company I shall review Sicilia, for whose sight I have a woman's longing.

Fortune speed us! Thus we set on, Camillo, to the sea-side.

I understand the business, I hear it: to have an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is necessary for a cut-purse, a good nose is requisite also, to smell out work for the other senses.

I see this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive.

What an exchange had this been without boot! What a boot is here with this exchange! Sure the gods do this year connive at us, and we may do any thing extempore.

Re-enter Clown and Shepherd Aside, aside, here is more matter for a hot brain: every lane's end, every shop, church, session, hanging, yields a careful man work.

See, see, what a man you are now! There is no other way but to tell the king she's a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.

She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh and blood has not offended the king, and so your flesh and blood is not to be punished by him.

Show those things you found about her, those secret things, all but what she has with her: this being done, let the law go whistle: I warrant you.

I will tell the king all, every word, yea, and his son's pranks too, who, I may say, is no honest man, neither to his father nor to me, to go about to make me the king's brother-in-law.

Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you could have been to him and then your blood had been the dearer by I know how much an ounce.

Well, let us to the king: there is that in this fardel will make him scratch his beard.

sometimes by chance: let me pocket up my pedlar's excrement.

Takes off his false beard How now, rustics! whither are you bound? To the palace, an it like your worship.

Your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition of that fardel, the place of your dwelling, your names, your ages, of what having, breeding, and any thing that is fitting to be known, discover.

Let me have no lying: it becomes none but tradesmen, and they often give us soldiers the lie: but we pay them for it with stamped coin, not stabbing steel, therefore they do not give us the lie.

Your worship had like to have given us one, if you had not taken yourself with the manner.

Are you a courtier, an't like you, sir? Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier.

What advocate hast thou to him? I know not, an't like you.

Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant: say you have none.

How blessed are we that are not simple men! Yet nature might have made me as these are, Therefore I will not disdain.

His garments are rich, but he wears them not handsomely.

He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical: a great man, I'll warrant, I know by the picking on's teeth.

Why, sir? The king is not at the palace, he is gone aboard a new ship to purge melancholy and air himself: for, if thou beest capable of things serious, thou must know the king is full of grief.

So 'tis said, sir, about his son, that should have married a shepherd's daughter.

If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly: the curses he shall have, the tortures he shall feel, will break the back of man, the heart of monster.

Remember 'stoned,' and 'flayed alive.' An't please you, sir, to undertake the business for us, here is that gold I have: I'll make it as much more and leave this young man in pawn till I bring it you.

Are you a party in this business? In some sort, sir: but though my case be a pitiful one, I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.

O, that's the case of the shepherd's son: hang him, he'll be made an example.

Comfort, good comfort! We must to the king and show our strange sights: he must know 'tis none of your daughter nor my sister, we are gone else.

Sir, I will give you as much as this old man does when the business is performed, and remain, as he says, your pawn till it be brought you.

Walk before toward the sea-side, go on the right hand: I will but look upon the hedge and follow you.

We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.

Let's before as he bids us: he was provided to do us good.

If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would not suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth.

To him will I present them: there may be matter in it.

True, too true, my lord: If, one by one, you wedded all the world, Or from the all that are took something good, To make a perfect woman, she you kill'd Would be unparallel'd.

Kill'd! She I kill'd! I did so: but thou strikest me Sorely, to say I did, it is as bitter Upon thy tongue as in my thought: now, good now, Say so but seldom.

Not at all, good lady: You might have spoken a thousand things that would Have done the time more benefit and graced Your kindness better.

'Tis your counsel My lord should to the heavens be contrary, Oppose against their wills.

To LEONTES Care not for issue, The crown will find an heir: great Alexander Left his to the worthiest, so his successor Was like to be the best.

She had, and would incense me To murder her I married.

Stars, stars, And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife, I'll have no wife, Paulina.

Will you swear Never to marry but by my free leave? Never, Paulina, so be blest my spirit! Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.

Unless another, As like Hermione as is her picture, Affront his eye.

My true Paulina, We shall not marry till thou bid'st us.

Shall be when your first queen's again in breath, Never till then.

One that gives out himself Prince Florizel, Son of Polixenes, with his princess, she The fairest I have yet beheld, desires access To your high presence.

What with him? he comes not Like to his father's greatness: his approach, So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us 'Tis not a visitation framed, but forced By need and accident.

His princess, say you, with him? Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think, That e'er the sun shone bright on.

Pardon, madam: The one I have almost forgot,--your pardon,-- The other, when she has obtain'd your eye, Will have your tongue too.

This is a creature, Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal Of all professors else, make proselytes Of who she but bid follow.

How! not women? Women will love her, that she is a woman More worth than any man, men, that she is The rarest of all women.

Go, Cleomenes, Yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends, Bring them to our embracement.

Had our prince, Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had pair'd Well with this lord: there was not full a month Between their births.

Prithee, no more, cease, thou know'st He dies to me again when talk'd of: sure, When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches Will bring me to consider that which may Unfurnish me of reason.

O my brother, Good gentleman! the wrongs I have done thee stir Afresh within me, and these thy offices, So rarely kind, are as interpreters Of my behind-hand slackness.

What might I have been, Might I a son and daughter now have look'd on, Such goodly things as you! Most noble sir, That which I shall report will bear no credit, Were not the proof so nigh.

Here in your city, I now came from him: I speak amazedly, and it becomes My marvel and my message.

Camillo has betray'd me, Whose honour and whose honesty till now Endured all weathers.

Lay't so to his charge: He's with the king your father.

Who? Camillo? Camillo, sir, I spake with him, who now Has these poor men in question.

Never saw I Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the earth, Forswear themselves as often as they speak: Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them With divers deaths in death.

O my poor father! The heaven sets spies upon us, will not have Our contract celebrated.

You are married? We are not, sir, nor are we like to be, The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first: The odds for high and low's alike.

My lord, Is this the daughter of a king? She is, When once she is my wife.

That 'once' I see by your good father's speed Will come on very slowly.

I am sorry, Most sorry, you have broken from his liking Where you were tied in duty, and as sorry Your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty, That you might well enjoy her.

Dear, look up: Though Fortune, visible an enemy, Should chase us with my father, power no jot Hath she to change our loves.

Beseech you, sir, Remember since you owed no more to time Than I do now: with thought of such affections, Step forth mine advocate, at your request My father will grant precious things as trifles.

Would he do so, I'ld beg your precious mistress, Which he counts but a trifle.

Sir, my liege, Your eye hath too much youth in't: not a month 'Fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazes Than what you look on now.

I will to your father: Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires, I am friend to them and you: upon which errand I now go toward him, therefore follow me And mark what way I make: come, good my lord.

The news, Rogero? Nothing but bonfires: the oracle is fulfilled, the king's daughter is found: such a deal of wonder is broken out within this hour that ballad-makers cannot be able to express it.

Here comes the Lady Paulina's steward: he can deliver you more.

Did you see the meeting of the two kings? Then have you lost a sight, which was to be seen, cannot be spoken of.

There might you have beheld one joy crown another, so and in such manner that it seemed sorrow wept to take leave of them, for their joy waded in tears.

There was casting up of eyes, holding up of hands, with countenances of such distraction that they were to be known by garment, not by favour.

I never heard of such another encounter, which lames report to follow it and undoes description to do it.

What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried hence the child? Like an old tale still, which will have matter to rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear open.

He was torn to pieces with a bear: this avouches the shepherd's son, who has not only his innocence, which seems much, to justify him, but a handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina knows.

The dignity of this act was worth the audience of kings and princes, for by such was it acted.

Who was most marble there changed colour, some swooned, all sorrowed: if all the world could have seen 't, the woe had been universal.

I thought she had some great matter there in hand, for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, ever since the death of Hermione, visited that removed house.

Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me, would preferment drop on my head.

But 'tis all one to me, for had I been the finder out of this secret, it would not have relished among my other discredits.

Here come those I have done good to against my will, and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.

Come, boy, I am past moe children, but thy sons and daughters will be all gentlemen born.

You denied to fight with me this other day, because I was no gentleman born.

Ay, or else 'twere hard luck, being in so preposterous estate as we are.

I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the faults I have committed to your worship and to give me your good report to the prince my master.

Prithee, son, do, for we must be gentle, now we are Thou wilt amend thy life? Ay, an it like your good worship.

Give me thy hand: I will swear to the prince thou art as honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.

Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors and franklins say it, I'll swear it.

Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow: if I do not wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk, not being a tall fellow, trust me not.

Hark! the kings and the princes, our kindred, are going to see the queen's picture.

O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort That I have had of thee! What, sovereign sir, I did not well I meant well.

As she lived peerless, So her dead likeness, I do well believe, Excels whatever yet you look'd upon Or hand of man hath done, therefore I keep it Lonely, apart.

But here it is: prepare To see the life as lively mock'd as ever Still sleep mock'd death: behold, and say 'tis well.

But yet, Paulina, Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing So aged as this seems.

So much the more our carver's excellence, Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her As she lived now.

As now she might have done, So much to my good comfort, as it is Now piercing to my soul.

And give me leave, And do not say 'tis superstition, that I kneel and then implore her blessing.

Lady, Dear queen, that ended when I but began, Give me that hand of yours to kiss.

O, patience! The statue is but newly fix'd, the colour's Not dry.

My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on, Which sixteen winters cannot blow away, So many summers dry, scarce any joy Did ever so long live, no sorrow But kill'd itself much sooner.

Dear my brother, Let him that was the cause of this have power To take off so much grief from you as he Will piece up in himself.

Indeed, my lord, If I had thought the sight of my poor image Would thus have wrought you,--for the stone is mine-- I'ld not have show'd it.

No longer shall you gaze on't, lest your fancy May think anon it moves.

The fixture of her eye has motion in't, As we are mock'd with art.

I'll draw the curtain: My lord's almost so far transported that He'll think anon it lives.

O sweet Paulina, Make me to think so twenty years together! No settled senses of the world can match The pleasure of that madness.

Let 't alone. I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirr'd you: but I could afflict you farther.

Do, Paulina, For this affliction has a taste as sweet As any cordial comfort.

Still, methinks, There is an air comes from her: what fine chisel Could ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me, For I will kiss her.

Good my lord, forbear: The ruddiness upon her lip is wet, You'll mar it if you kiss it, stain your own With oily painting.

Shall I draw the curtain? No, not these twenty years.

Either forbear, Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you For more amazement.

If you can behold it, I'll make the statue move indeed, descend And take you by the hand, but then you'll think-- Which I protest against--I am assisted By wicked powers.

What you can make her do, I am content to look on: what to speak, I am content to hear, for 'tis as easy To make her speak as move.

Then all stand still, On: those that think it is unlawful business I am about, let them depart.

Music, awake her, strike! 'Tis time, descend, be stone no more, approach, Strike all that look upon with marvel.

Come, I'll fill your grave up: stir, nay, come away, Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him Dear life redeems you.

You perceive she stirs: HERMIONE comes down Start not, her actions shall be holy as You hear my spell is lawful: do not shun her Until you see her die again, for then You kill her double.

Nay, present your hand: When she was young you woo'd her, now in age Is she become the suitor? O, she's warm! If this be magic, let it be an art Lawful as eating.

She hangs about his neck: If she pertain to life let her speak too.

Ay, and make't manifest where she has lived, Or how stolen from the dead.

That she is living, Were it but told you, should be hooted at Like an old tale: but it appears she lives, Though yet she speak not.

Mark a little while. Please you to interpose, fair madam: kneel And pray your mother's blessing.

You gods, look down And from your sacred vials pour your graces Upon my daughter's head! Tell me, mine own.

There's time enough for that, Lest they desire upon this push to trouble Your joys with like relation.

Go together, You precious winners all, your exultation Partake to every one.

I, an old turtle, Will wing me to some wither'd bough and there My mate, that's never to be found again, Lament till I am lost.

O, peace, Paulina! Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent, As I by thine a wife: this is a match, And made between's by vows.

Thou hast found mine, But how, is to be question'd, for I saw her, As I thought, dead, and have in vain said many A prayer upon her grave.

I'll not seek far-- For him, I partly know his mind--to find thee An honourable husband.

Come, Camillo, And take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty Is richly noted and here justified By us, a pair of kings.

Let's from this place. What! look upon my brother: both your pardons, That e'er I put between your holy looks My ill suspicion.

This is your son-in-law, And son unto the king, who, heavens directing, Is troth-plight to your daughter.

Good Paulina, Lead us from hence, where we may leisurely Each one demand an answer to his part Perform'd in this wide gap of time since first We were dissever'd: hastily lead away.

